- I watched my agent happily click the "I'm
not a robot" button. I made the agent
very aware. Like, it knows
what his source code is. It
understands th- how it
sits and runs in its own
harness. It knows where
documentation is. It knows which
model it runs. It understands its own
system that made it very easy for an agent
to... Oh, you don't like
anything? You just prompted it to
existence, and then the agent would
just modify its own software. People
talk about self-modifying software, I just
built it. I actually think wipe coding is
a slur.
- You prefer agentic engineering?
- Yeah, I always tell people I'd- I do
agentic engineering, and then maybe after
3:00 AM, I switch to wipe coding, and
then I have regrets on the next day.
- What a walk of shame.
- Yeah, you just have to clean up
and, like, fix your sh- shit.
- We've all been there.
- I used to write really long prompts. And
by writing, I mean, I don't write, I- I-
I talk, you know? These- these hands are,
like, too- too precious for
writing now. I just- I just use
bespoke prompts to build my software.
- So, you, for real, with all those
terminals, are using voice?
- Yeah. I used to do it very extensively,
to the point where there was a
period where I lost my voice.
- I mean, I have to ask you, just
curious. I- I know you've probably
gotten huge offers from major companies.
Can you speak to who you're
considering working with?
- Yeah.
- The following is a conversation
with Peter Steinberger, creator
of OpenClaw, formerly known as MoldBot,
ClawedBot, Clawdus, Claude,
spelled with a W as in
lobster claw. Not to be confused
with Claud, the AI model from
Anthropic, spelled with a U. In fact, this
confusion is the reason
Anthropic kindly asked Peter to
change the name to OpenClaw. So, what is
OpenClaw? It's an open-source AI
agent that has taken over the
tech world in a matter of days,
exploding in popularity, reaching over
180,000 stars on GitHub,
and spawning the social
network mold book, where AI
agents post manifestos and
debate consciousness, creating a
mix of excitement and fear in the
general public. And a
kind of AI psychosis, a
mix of clickbait fearmongering
and genuine, fully
justifiable concern about the
role of AI in our digital,
interconnected human world.
OpenClaw, as its tagline
states, is the AI that
actually does things. It's an
autonomous AI assistant that lives
in your computer, has access to
all of your stuff, if you let it,
talks to you through Telegram,
WhatsApp, Signal, iMessage, and
whatever else messaging client.
Uses whatever AI model you like, including
Claude Opus 4.6 and GPT 5.3 Codex,
all to do stuff for you.
Many people are calling
this one of the biggest moments in the
recent history of AI, since the launch of
ChatGPT in November 2022.
The ingredients for this
kind of AI agent were all there,
but putting it all together in a
system that definitively takes
a step forward over the line
from language to agency, from
ideas to actions, in a way that
created a useful assistant that
feels like one who gets you and
learns from you, in an open
source, community-driven way, is
the reason OpenClaw took
the internet by storm.
Its power, in large part, comes from the fact
that you can give it access to all of your
stuff and give it permission to
do anything with that stuff in
order to be useful to you. This is very
powerful, but it is also dangerous. OpenClaw
represents freedom, but with freedom comes
responsibility. With it, you
can own and have control
over your data, but precisely
because you have this control, you
also have the responsibility to
protect it from cybersecurity
threats of various kinds. There
are great ways to protect
yourself, but the threats and
vulnerabilities are out there.
Again, a powerful AI agent
with system- level access is a
security minefield, but it also
represents the future. Because
when done well and securely,
it can be extremely useful
to each of us humans as a personal assistant.
We discuss all of this with Peter, and
also discuss his
big-picture programming and
entrepreneurship life story,
which I think is truly
inspiring. He spent 13
years building PSPDF
Kit, which is a software used on a billion
devices. He sold it, and for a brief time,
fell out of love with programming,
vanished for three years, and
then came back, rediscovered his
love for programming, and built,
in a very short time, an open
source AI agent that took the
internet by storm. He is,
in many ways, the symbol
of the AI revolution happening in
the programming world. There was the
ChatGPT moment in 2022, the DeepSeek moment
in 2025, and now, in '26, we're living
through the OpenClaw moment,
the age of the lobster.
The start of the agentic AI
revolution. What a time to be
alive. This is a Lex Fridman
podcast. To support it, please
check out our sponsors in the description,
or you can also find links to contact
me, ask questions, give
feedback, and so on.
And now, dear friends,
here's Peter Steinberger.
The one and only, the
Clawed Father. Actually,
Benjamin predicted it in his tweet.
"The following is a conversation with
Claude, a respected crustacean." It's a
hilarious-looking picture of a
lobster in a suit, so I think the
prophecy has been fulfilled. Let's
go to this moment when you
built a prototype in one
hour, that was the early version
of OpenClaw. I think this,
Story's really inspiring to
a lot of people because this
prototype led to something that
just took the internet by storm....
and became the fastest-growing
repository in GitHub history,
with now over 175,000 stars. So, what
was the story of the one-hour prototype?
- You know, I wanted that since April.
- A personal assistant.
AI personal assistant.
- Yeah. And I, I played around with
some other things, like even
stuff that gets all my WhatsApp,
and I could just run queries
on it. That was back when we had
GPT-4.1, with the one million context
window. And I, I pulled in all the
data and then just asked him questions
like, "What makes this
friendship meaningful?"
- Mm-hmm.
- And I got some, some really profound
results. Like, I sent it to my friends
and they got, like, teary eyes.
- So, there's something there.
- Yeah. But then I... I thought
all the labs will, will,
will work on that. So
I, I moved on to other
things, and that was still
very much in my early days of
experimenting and pl- playing.
You know, you have to...
That's how you learn. You just like,
you do stuff and you play. And
time flew by and it was November.
I wanted to make sure that
the thing I started is actually happening.
I was annoyed that it didn't exist, so
I just prompted it into existence.
- I mean, that's the beginning of the
hero's journey of the entrepreneur,
right? And you've even
with your original story
with PS PDF kit, it's like, "Why
does this not exist? Let me build
it." And again, here's diff- a whole
different realm, but similar maybe spirit.
- Yeah, so I had this problem. I tried
to show PDF on an iPad, which should
not be hard.
- This is like 15 years
ago, something like that.
- Yeah. Like the most, the most
random thing ever. And suddenly, I
had this problem and I, I
wanted to help a friend. And
there was, there was... Well, not like
nothing existed, but it was just not good.
And like... Like I tried
it and it was like very,
"Nah." Like, "Hmm, I can do this better."
- By the way, for people who don't know,
this led to the development of PS PDF
kit that's used on a billion devices.
So, the... It turns out that
it's pretty useful to
be able to open a PDF.
- You could also make the joke
that I'm really bad at naming.
- Yeah.
- Like, name number five on the
current project. And even
PS PDF doesn't really
roll from the tongue.
- Anyway, so you said "Screw it. Why don't
I do it?" So what was the... What was
the prototype? What was the thing that
you... What was the magical thing that you built
in a short amount of time that you were like,
"This might actually work as an agent,"
where I talk to it and it does things?
- There was... Like, one of my projects
before already did something
where I could bring my
terminals onto the web and then
I could, like, interact with them, but
there also would be terminals on my Mac.
- Mm-hmm.
- Viptunnel, which was like
a, a weekend hack project
that was still very early.
And it was cloud code
times. You know, you got a dopamine hit
when you got something right. And now
I get, like, mad when
you get something wrong.
- And you had a really great -– not to take a
tangent -– but a great blog post describing that
you converted Viptunnel. You vibe-coded
Viptunnel from TypeScript into Zig
of all programming languages with
a single prompt. One prompt, one shot.
Convert the entire code base into Zig.
- Yeah. There was this one thing
where part of the architecture
was... Took too much
memory. Every terminal
used like a node. And I
wanted to change it to Rust
and... I mean, I can do
it. I can, I can manually
figure it all out, but all my
automated attempts failed miserably.
And then I revisited about four
or five months later. And I'm
like, "Okay, now let's use something
even more experimental." And
I, and I just typed, "Convert
this and this part to
Sig," and then let Codex run off. And
it basically got it right. There was
one little detail that I had to,
like, modify afterwards,
but it just ran for
overnight or like six hours and
just did its thing. And it's
like... It's just mind-blowing.
- So that's on the LLM programming side,
refactoring. But uh, back to the
actual story of the of the prototype. So
how did Viptunnel connect to the first
prototype where your, like,
agents can actually work?
- Well, that was still very limited.
You know, like I had this one
experiment with WhatsApp, then I had
this experiment, and both felt like
not the right answer. And then
my search bar was literally
just hooking up WhatsApp to
cloud code. One shot. The CLI message comes
in. I call the CLI with -p. It does its
magic, I get the string back and I send
it back to WhatsApp. And I, I built
this in one hour. And
I felt... Already felt really cool. It's
like, "Oh, I could... I can, like, talk to my
computer," right? This... That,
that was, that was cool. But
I, I wanted images, 'cause I
alw- I often use images when I
prompt. I think it's such a, such an
efficient way to give the agent more
context. And they are really good at figuring
out what I mean, e- even if it's like
a, a weird cropped-up screenshot. So
I used it a lot and I wanted to do
that in WhatsApp as well. Also, like, you
know, just you run around, you see like
a poster of an event, you just
make a screenshot and like
figure out if I have time there, if this is
good, if my friends are maybe up for that.
Just like images seemed im-
important. So I, I worked
a few... It took me a few more hours
to actually get that right. Um,
and then it was just...... I, I used
it a lot. And funny enough, that was
just before I went on a trip
to Marrakesh with my friends
for a birthday trip. And there
it was even better because
internet was a little shaky but WhatsApp
just works, you know? It's like doesn't
matter, you have, like, edge,
it still works. WhatsApp is
just... It's just made really well.
So I ended up using it a lot. Um,
translate this for me, explain
this, find me places. Like, you
just having a clanker
doing, having Google for
you, that was... Basically there
was still nothing built but
it still could do so much.
- So, if we talk about the full journey
that's happening there with the agent,
you're just sending on this
very thin line WhatsApp message
via CLI, it's going to a cloud code
and cloud code is doing all kinds of
heavy work and coming back
to you with a thin message.
- Yeah. It was slow because every time I boot
up the CLI, but it... It was really cool
already. And it could just use
all the things that I already had
built. I had built like a whole bunch of
CLI stuff over the month so it, it felt
really powerful.
- There is something magical about that
experience that's hard to put into
words. Being able to use a chat client
to talk to an agent, versus,
like, sitting behind
a computer and like, I don't know, using
cursor or even using Cloud Code CLI in the
terminal. It's a different experience than being
able to sit back and talk to it. I
mean, it seems like a trivial step
but, it- in some sense it's
a... It's like a phase shift
in the integration of AI into your
life and how it feels, right?
- Yeah. Yeah. I, I read this tweet this
morning where someone said, "Oh, there's
no magic in it. It's just like,
it does this and this and this and
this and this and this." And it
almost feels like a hobby, just
as cursor or perplexity. And I'm
like, well, if that's a hobby
that's kind of a compliment, you
know? They're like, they're not
doing too bad. Thank you I guess?
Yes. I mean, isn't, isn't,
isn't magic often just
like you take a lot of things
that are already there
but bring them together in new
ways? Like, I don't... There's
no... Yeah. Maybe there's no
magic in there but sometimes just
rearranging things and, like, adding a few
new ideas is all the magic that you need.
- It's really hard to convert into
words what is, what is magic
about a thing. If you look
at the, the scrolling on an
iPhone, why is that so pleasant?
There's a lot of elements about that
interface that makes it incredibly pleasant,
that is fundamental to the experience of
using a smartphone, and it's like,
okay, all the components were
there. Scrolling was there,
everything was there.
- Nobody did it-
- Yep
- ... and afterwards it felt so obvious.
- Yeah, so obvious.
- Right? But still... You
know the moment where
it, it blew my mind was when,
when I- I used it a lot and then at
some point I just sent it a message
and, and then a typing indicator
appeared. And I'm like, wait, I
didn't build that, it only m-
it only has image support, so
what is it even doing? And
then it would just reply.
- What was the thing you sent it?
- Oh, just a random question like, "Hey,
what about this in this restaurant?" You
know? Because we were just running
around and checking out the city.
So that's why I, I didn't, didn't
even think when I used it because
sometimes when you're in a
hurry typing is annoying.
- So, oh, you did an audio message?
- Yeah. And it just, it just
worked and I'm like...
- And it's not supposed to work because-
- No
- ... you didn't give it that-
- No, literally
- ... capability.
- I literally went, "How the fuck did
he do that?" And it was like, "Yeah,
the mad lad did the following.
He sent me a message but
it only, only was a file
and no file ending." So
I checked out the header of the
file and it found that it was,
like, opus so I used ffmpeg
to convert it and then I
wanted to use whisper but it didn't
had it installed. But then I found the
OpenAI key and just used Curl to send the
file to OpenAI to translate and here I am.
Just looked at the message
I'm like, "Oh wow."
- You didn't teach it any of those things and the agent
just figured it out, did all those conversions,
the translations. It figured out the
API, it figured out which program to
use, all those kinds of things. And you
were just absent-mindedly just sent an
audio message when it came back.
- Yeah, like, so clever even because he would have gotten
the whisper local path, he would have had to download a
model. It would have been too slow.
So like, there's so much world
knowledge in there, so much creative
problem solving. A lot of it
I think mapped from... If you get really
good at coding that means you have to
be really good at general purpose problem
solving. So that's a skill, right? And
that just maps into other
domains. So it had the problem of
like, what is this file with no
file ending? Let's figure it
out. And that's when it kind of clicked
for me. It's like, I was like very
impressed. And somebody sent a pull
request for Discord support and I'm
like, "This is a WhatsApp relay.
That doesn't, doesn't fit at all."
- At that time it was called WA Relay.
- Yeah. And so I debated with me like, do I
want that? Do I not want that? And then
I thought, well maybe,
maybe I do that because
that could be a cool way to show people.
Because I... So far I did it in WhatsApp
as like groups you know
but don't really want
to give my phone number to
every internet stranger.
- Yeah.
- Um, journalists manage to do that
anyhow now so that's a different
story. So I merged it-... from Shadow,
who helped me a lot with the whole
project. So, thank you. And, and I put
my, my bot in there.
- On Discord?
- Yeah. No security because I didn't...
I hadn't built sandboxing in
yet. I, I just prompted it
to, like, only listen to me.
And then some people came
and tried to hack it, and I
just... Or, like, just watched and I
just kept working in the open, you
know? Like, y- I used my agent
to build my agent harness
and to test, like,
various stuff. And that's
very quickly when it clicked for
people. So it's almost like it needs to
be experienced. And from that time on,
that was January the 1st, I, I got
my first real influencer being a fan and
did videos, dachitze. Thank you. And, and
from there on, I saw, I started gaining
up speed. And at the same time, my,
my sleep cycle went shorter and
shorter because I, I felt the storm
coming, and I just worked my ass off to
get it to... into a state where it's kinda
good.
- There's a few components and we'll talk about
how it all works, but basically, you're able to
talk to it using WhatsApp, Telegram,
Discord. So that's a component
that you have to get right.
- Yeah.
- And then you have to figure out the agentic
loop, you have to have the gateway, you
have the harness, you have all those
components that make it all just work nicely.
- Yeah. It felt like
Factorio times infinite.
- Right.
- I, I feel like I built
my little- ... my little
playground. Like, I never had so much fun
than building this project. You know?
Like, you have like, "Oh," I go like, level
one agentic loop. What can I do there?
How can I be smart at queuing
messages? How can I make it more
human-like? Oh, then I had this
idea of... Because the loop
always... The agent always
replies something, but you don't
always want an agent to reply something
in a group chat. So I gave him this
no-reply token. So I gave him an option
to shut up. So it, it feels more natural.
- That's level two.
- Y- uh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, on the- on the-
- Factorio.
- On the agentic loop. And
then I go to memory, right?
- Yeah.
- You want him to, like, remember
stuff. So maybe, maybe the
end... The ultimate boss is
continuous reinforcement learning,
but I'm, I'm, like, at... I feel like
I'm level two or three with Markdown
files and the vector database.
And then you, you can go to level
community management, you
can go to level website and
marketing. There's just so many
hats that you have to have on. Uh,
not even talking about native
apps. That's just, like, infinite
different levels and infinite
level ups you can do.
- So the whole time you're having fun.
We should say that for the most
part, throughout this whole
process, you're a one-man
team. There's people helping, but you're
doing so much of the key core development.
- Yeah.
- And having fun? You did, in January,
6,600 commits. Probably more.
- I sometimes posted a meme. I'm limited by
the technology of my time. I could do more
if agents would be faster.
- But we should say you're running
multiple agents at the same time.
- Yeah. Depending on how much I slept and
how difficult of the tasks I
work on, between four and 10.
- Four and 10 agents. Uh there's so
many possible directions, speaking of
Factorio, that we can go here. But one
big picture one is, why do you think
your work, Open Claw, won? In this
world, if you look at 2025, so many
startups, so many companies
were doing kind of agentic type
stuff, or claiming to.
And here, Open Claw comes
in and destroys everybody.
Like, why did you win?
- Because they all take
themselves too serious.
- Yeah.
- Like, it's hard to compete against
someone who's just there to have fun.
- Yeah.
- I wanted it to be fun, I wanted it
to be weird. And if you see, like,
all the, all the lobster stuff online
I think I, I managed weird. I... You
know, for the longest
time, the only, the only
way to install it was git clone,
pnpm build, pnpm gateway.
Like, you clone it, you build
it, you run it. And then
the, the agent... I made the
agent very aware. Like, it
knows that it is... What
its source code is. It
understands th- how it
sits and runs in its own
harness. It knows where
documentation is. It knows which
model it runs. It knows if you turn on
the voice or, or reasoning mode. Like,
I, I wanted to be more human-like, so
it understands its own system that
made it very easy for an agent to...
Oh, you don't like anything? You just prompted
it to existence, and then the agent would
just modify its own software. Um,
you know, we have people talk about self-
modifying software. I just built it and
didn't even... I didn't even plan
it so much. It just happened.
- Can you actually speak to that? 'Cause
it's just fascinating. So you have this
piece of software that's
written in TypeScript-
- Yeah
- ... that's able to, via
the agentic loop, modify
itself. I mean, what a
moment to be alive in
the history of humanity and the
history of programming. Here's
the thing that's used by a
huge amount of people to do
incredibly powerful things in
their lives, and that very
system can rewrite itself, can modify
itself. Can you just, like, speak
to the power of that? Like, isn't
that incredible? Like, when did
you first close the loop on that?
- Oh, because that's how I built it as
well, you know? Most of it is built by
Codex, but oftentimes I... When I debug
it, I...... I use
self-introspection so much.
It's like, "Hey, what tools do you see? Can you
call the tool yourself?" Or like, "What error do
you see? Read the source code.
Figure out what's the problem."
Like, I just found it
an incredibly fun way
to... That the agent, the very
agent and software that you
use is used to debug itself, so that it
felt just natural that everybody does
that. And that it led to so many,
so many pull requests by people who
never wrote software. I mean, it
also did show that people never wrote
software . So I call them prompt requests
in the end. But I don't want
to, like, pull that down
because every time someone made
the first pull request is a
win for our society, you know?
Like, it... Like, it doesn't matter
how, how shitty it is, y-
you gotta start somewhere.
So I know there's, like, this
whole big movement of people
complain about open source and the quality
of PRs, and a whole different level of
problems. But on a different
level, I found it... I found it
very meaningful that, that I built
something that people love to think
of so much that they actually start
to learn how open source works.
- Yeah, you were ... The
Open Cloud project was the
first pull request. You were
the first for so many. That is
magical. So many people that
don't know how to program
are taking their first step into
the programming world with this.
- Isn't that a step up for
humanity? Isn't that cool?
- Creating builders.
- Yeah. Like, the bar to do that
was so high, and, like, with
agents, and with the right software,
it just, like, went lower and lower.
I don't know. I was at a... And I also
organize another type of meetup. I call
it... I called it Cloud Code Anonymous.
Uh, you can get the inspiration
from. Now, I call it Agents
Anonymous- ... for, for reasons.
- Agents Anonymous.
- And-
- Oh, it's so funny on so many
levels. I'm sorry, go ahead.
- Yeah. And there was this one guy who,
who talked to me. He's like, "I run this
design agency, and we, we
never had custom software. And
now I have, like, 25 little
web services for various
things that help me in my business.
And I don't even know how
they work, but they work." Uh, and
he was just, like, very happy that
my stuff solved some of his problems.
And he was, like, curious enough that he
actually came to, like, a, a Enchantic
meetup, even though he's... He doesn't
really know how software works.
- Can we actually rewind a little bit
and tell the saga of the name change?
First of all, it started out as Wa-Relay.
- Yeah.
- And then it went to-
- Claude's.
- Yeah. You know, when I, when I built it in
the beginning, my agent had no personality.
It was just... It was Claude
Code. It's like this sycophantic
opus, very friendly. And I... When you
talk to a friend on WhatsApp, they don't
talk like Claude Code. So I wanted...
I, I felt this... I just didn't f- It didn't
feel right, so I, I wanted to give it
a personality.
- Make it spicier, make it-
- Yeah
- ... something. By the way, that's actually hard
to put into words as well. And we should mention
that, of course, you create
the soul.md, inspired by
Anthropic's constitutional AI work-
- Mm-hmm
- ... how to make it spicy.
- Partially, it picked up a little bit
from me. You know, like those things
are text completion engines
in a way. So, so I,
I, I, I had fun working with it, and
then I told it to... How I wanted it to
interact with me, and just,
like, write your own agents.md,
Give yourself a name. And then we...
I didn't even know how the whole,
the whole lobster... I mean, people only do
lobster... Originally, it was actually a lobster in
a, in a TARDIS, because I'm
also a big Doctor Who fan.
- Was there a space lobster?
- Yeah.
- I heard. What's that have
to do with anything?
- Yeah, I just wanted to make it weird.
There was no... There was no big
grand plan. I'm just having fun here.
- Oh, so I guess the lobster is already weird,
and then the space lobster is an extra weird.
- Yeah, yeah, because the-
- Yeah
- ... the TARDIS is basically
the, the harness, but
cannot call it TARDIS, so we called it
Claude's. So that was name number two.
- Yeah.
- And then it never really
rolled off the tongue.
So when more people came,
again, I talked with my agent,
Claude. At least that's what
I used to call him. Now-
- Claude spelled with a W-C-L-A-U-D-E.
- Yeah.
- Versus C-L-A-U-D-E from
Anthropic.
- Yeah.
- Which is part of what makes it funny,
I think. The play on the letters
and the words in the TARDIS and the
lobster and the space lobster
is hilarious. But I can see why
it can lead into problems.
- Yeah, they didn't find it so funny .
So then I got the domain ClaudeBot,
and I just... I love the domain. And
it was, like, short. It was
catchy. I'm like, "Yeah, let's do
that." I didn't... I didn't think
it would be that big at this time.
And then just when it exploded, I got,
Kudos, a very friendly email
from one of the employees
that they didn't like the name.
- One of the Anthropic employees.
- Yeah. So actually, Kudos,
because they shou- could have
just sent a, a lawyer letter,
but they've been nice about
it. But also like, "You have to change
this and fast." And I asked for two days,
because changing a name is hard, because
you have to find everything, you
know, Twitter handle, domains, NPM
packages Docker registry, GitHub stuff.
And everything has to be......
you need a set of everything.
- And also, can we comment on the fact that
you're increasingly attacked, followed by
crypto folks? Which I think you mentioned
somewhere that that means the name
change had to be... Because
they were trying to snipe,
they were trying to steal, and so you had
to be... The, the na- I mean, from an
engineering perspective, it's just
fascinating. You had to make the name change
Atomic, make sure it's
changed everywhere at once.
- Yeah. Failed very hard at that.
- You did?
- I, I underestimated those
people. It's a, it's a very
interesting subculture. Like,
it... Everything circles around... I'll
probably get a lot wrong and we'll probably get
hate for that if you say
that, but... There is like
Bags app and then they, they tokenize
everything. And th- they did the
same back with Swipe Tunnel, but to a much
smaller degree. It was not that
annoying. But on this project, they've
been, they've been swarming me. They,
they... It's like every half an hour,
someone came into Discord and, and, and
spammed it and we had to block the p- We have,
like, server rules, and one of
the rules was... One of the rules
is no mentioning of butter.
For obvious reasons. And one was,
no talk about finance stuff or
crypto. Because I'm... I- I'm just
not interested in that, and this
is a space about the project and
not about some finance stuff.
But yeah. They came in
and, and spammed and...
Annoying. And on Twitter, they
would ping me all the time.
My, my notification feed was
unusable. I, I could barely
see actual people talking about this
stuff because it was like swarms.
- Mm-hmm.
- And everybody sent me the hashes.
Um... And they all try me to
claim the fees. Like, "Are you helping
the project?" Claim the fees. No,
you're actually harming the project.
You're, like, disrupting my
work, and I am not interested in any fees.
I'm... First of all, I'm
financially comfortable. Second of
all, I don't want to
support that because it's
so far the worst form of online
harassment that I've experienced.
- Yeah. There's a lot of toxicity in
the crypto world. It's sad because
the technology of cr- cryptocurrency
is fascinating, powerful and maybe
will define the future
of money, but the actual
community around that, there's so much to-
toxicity, there's so much greed. There's so much
trying to get a shortcut to
manipulate, to, to steal, to snipe,
to, to, to, to game the system somehow
to get money. All this kind of
stuff that... Uh... I mean, it's the
human nature, I suppose, when you
connect human nature with money
and greed and and especially in
the online world with anonymity and
all that kind of stuff. But from the
engineering perspective, it makes
your life challenging. When Anthropic
reaches out, you have to do a
name change. And then there-
there's, there's like all these, like,
Game of Thrones or Lord of the Rings
armies of different kinds
you have to be aware of.
- Yeah. There was no perfect name,
and I didn't sleep for two nights.
I was under high pressure. Um, I was
trying to get, like, a good set of
domains and, you know,
not cheap, not easy,
'cause in this, in this state of
the internet, you basically have to
buy domains if you want
to have a good set. And,
and then another ca- another email came
in that the lawyers are getting uneasy.
Again, friendly, but also
just adding more stress to my situation
already. So at this point I was just like,
"Sorry, there's no other word. Fuck
it." And I just, I just renamed it to
Mod Bot 'cause that was the set
of domains I had. I was not
really happy, but I thought it'll be fine.
And I tell you, everything
that could go wrong-
... did go wrong. Everything that could
go wrong did go wrong. It's incredible.
I, I, I thought I, I had mapped the h- the
space out and reserved
the important things.
- Can you ga- give some details of the stuff that
gone wrong? 'Cause it's interesting from, like, an
engineering perspective.
- Well, the, the interesting stuff is that
none of these services have, have a squatter
protection. So, I had two browser
windows open. One was like a,
an empty account ready to be
rename- renamed to Claude
Bot, and the other one I renamed
to Mod Bot. So, I pressed
rename there, I pressed rename
there, and in those five seconds,
they stole the account name.
Literally, the five seconds of
dragging the mouse over there and
pressing rename there was too long.
- Wow.
- Because there's no... Those systems... I
mean, you would expect that they have some
protection or, like, an
automatic forwarding, but
there's nothing like that.
And I didn't know that
they're not just good at harassment,
they're also really good
at using scripts and tools.
- Yeah.
- So, yeah. So, suddenly,
like, the old account
was promoting new tokens
and serving malware.
And I was like, "Okay,
let's move over to GitHub,"
and I pressed rename on GitHub. And the
GitHub renaming thing is
slightly confusing, so I
renamed my personal account.
And in those... I guess it
took me 30 seconds to realize
my mistake. They sniped
my account, serving
malware from my account.
So, I was like, "Okay, let's at
least do the NPM stuff," but
that takes, like, a minute to upload. They
sniped, they sniped the NPM
package, 'cause I could reserve
the account, but I didn't reserve
the root package.... so like
everything that could go
wrong , like went wrong.
- Can I just ask a, a curious question
of, in that moment you're sitting
there, like how shitty do you feel?
That's a pretty hopeless feeling, right?
- Yeah. Because all I wanted was like
having fun with that project and to
keep building on it. And yet
here I am like days into
researching names, picking
a name I didn't like.
And having people that claimed
they helped me making my
life miserable in every possible
way. And honestly, I was
that close of just
deleting it. I was like,
"I did show you the future, you build it."
- Yeah.
- I... That was a big part of me
that got a lot of joy out of
that idea. And then I thought about
all the people that already co-
contributed to it, and I
couldn't do it because
they had plans with it, and they put time
in it. And it just didn't feel right.
- Well, I think a lot of people listening
to this are deeply grateful that you
persevered. But it's... I, I
can tell. I can tell it's a
low point. This is the first time
you hit a wall of, this is not fun?
- No, no, I was like close to crying. It
was like, okay, everything's fucked.
- Yeah.
- Um... I am like super tired.
- Uh, and now like how do you even, how do
you undo that? You know, l- luckily, and
thankfully, like I, I
have... Because I have
a little bit of following
already. Like I had friends
at Twitter, I had friends
at GitHub who like
moved heaven and earth to like help me.
And it is not... That's not something
that's easy. Like, like
GitHub tried to like
clean up the mess and then they
ran into like platform bugs .
'Cause it's not happening so often
that things get renamed on that
level. So, it took them a
few hours. The MBM stuff
was even more difficult because
it's a whole different team.
On the Twitter side, things are not as
easy as well. It, it took them like a day
to really also like do the redirect.
And then I also had to like
do all the renaming in the project. Then
there's also, uh, ClaudeHub, which I didn't
even finish the rename there because
I, I, I managed to get people on
it and then someone just like collapsed and
slept. And then I woke up and I'm like,
I made a, a beta version for
the new stuff and I, I just,
I just couldn't live with the
name. It's like, you know... But
but, you know, it's just been so
much drama. So, I had the real
struggle with me like I never want to touch
that again, and I really don't like the
name. Um,
so, and I... There was also this
like... Then there was all the
security people that started
emailing me like mad. Um, I was bombarded
on Twitter, on email. There's like a
thousand other things I should do.
And I'm like thinking about the
name which is like, it should be
like the least important thing.
Um, and then I was really close
in... Oh God, I don't even... Honestly,
I don't even wanna say the, my other
name choices because it probably would
get tokenized, so I'm not gonna say it.
- Yeah.
- But I slept on it once more, and
then I had the idea for OpenClaw
and that felt much better. And by
then, I had the boss move that I
actually called Sam to
ask if OpenClaw is okay.
OpenClaw.AI. You know? 'Cause 'cause like-
- You didn't wanna go through
the whole thing. Yeah.
- Oh, that it's like, "Please tell
me this is fine." I don't think
they can actually claim that, but
it felt like the right thing to do.
And I did another rename. Like just Codex
alone took like 10 hours to rename the
project 'cause it, it's a bit
more tricky than a search
replace and I, I wanted everything
renamed, not just on the outside. And that
rename, I, I felt I had like
my, my war room. But then
I, I had like some contributors really
that helped me. We made a whole plan
of all the names we have to squat.
- And you had to be super secret about it?
- Yeah. Nobody could know. Like I literally was
monitoring Twitter if like, if there's any mention
of OpenClaw.
- Mm-hmm.
- And like with reloading, it's like, "Okay,
they don't, they don't expect anything
yet." Then I created a few decoy names.
And all the shit I shouldn't have to
do. You know? Like, you know-
- Yeah, yeah
- ... it's helping the project.
Like, I lost like 10 hours just by
having to plan this in full
secrecy like, like a war game.
- Yeah, this is the Manhattan Project
of the 21st century. It's renaming-
- It's so s- ... so stupid. Uh like I still
was like, "Oh, should I, should I keep it?"
Then I was like, "No, the
mold's not growing on
me." And then I think I had final all
the pieces together. I didn't get a .com
but, yeah, it's
been like quite a bit of money on the other
domains. I tried to reach out again to
GitHub but I feel like I, I used up all
my goodwill there, so I... 'Cause I, I, I
wanted them to do this thing atomically-
- Mm-hmm
- ... But that didn't happen and
then so I did that the f- as first
thing. Uh, Twitter people were very
supportive. I, I actually paid 10K for the
business account so I could claim the-...
OpenClaw, which was, like, unused since
2016, but was claimed. And yeah, and then I
finally ... This time I
managed everything in one go.
Nothing, almost nothing got wrong. The
only thing that did go wrong is that
I was not allowed by
trademark rules to get
OpenClaw.AI, and someone copied
the website as serving malware.
- Yeah.
- I'm not even allowed to keep
the redirects. Like, I have to
return ... Like, I have to give
Entropik the domains, and I
cannot do redirects, so if you go on
claw.bot next week, it'll just be a 404.
- Yeah.
- And I- I'm not sure how
trademark ... Like, I didn't,
I didn't do that much research into
trademark law, but I think that could,
could be handled in a way that
is safer, because ultimately those
people will then Google and maybe find
malware sites that I
have no control on them.
- The point is, that whole saga,
Made a dent in your whole f-
the funness of the
journey, which sucks. So,
let's just, let's just get, I suppose, get
back to fun. And during this, speaking of
fun, the two-day MoltBot saga.
- Yeah, two years.
- MoltBook was created.
- Yeah.
- Which was another thing that went
viral as a kind of demonstration,
illustration of how what is now
called OpenClaw could be used
to create something epic. So for
people who are not aware, MoltBook is
just a bunch of agents
talking to each other in a
Reddit-style social network.
And a bunch of people take
screenshots of those agents doing things
like, Scheming against humans. And
that instilled in folks a kind
of, you know, fear, panic, and
hype. W- what are your thoughts
about MoltBook in general?
- I think it's art. It is, it is like the
finest slop, you know, just like the slop
from France.
- Yeah.
- I- I saw it before going to
bed, and even though I was
tired, I spent another hour
just reading up on that
and, and just being
entertained. I, I just felt
very entertained, you know? The- I saw the
the reactions, and, like, there was one reporter
who's calling me about, "This is the end of
the world, and we have AGI." And
I'm just like, "No, this is just,
this is just really fine slop."
You know, if, if I wouldn't have created
this, this whole onboarding experience
where you, you infuse your agent with your
personality and give him, give him character,
I think that reflected on a lot of
how different the replies to MoltBook
are. Because if it were all, if
it were all be ChatGPT or Cloud Code, it
would be very different. It
would be much more the same.
- Mm-hmm.
- But because people are, like, so different,
and they create their agents in so
different ways and use it in so
different ways, that also reflects
on how they ultimately write there. And
also, you, you don't know
how much of that is really
done autonomic, autonomous,
or how much is, like, humans
being funny and, like, telling the agent, "Hey,
write about the deep plan, the end of the world, on
MoltBook, ha, ha, ha."
- Well, I think, I mean, my criticism
of MoltBook is that I believe
a lot of the stuff that was
screenshotted is human prompted. Which,
just look at the incentive of
how the whole thing was used.
It's obvious to me at least
that a lot of it was humans
prompting the thing so they can
then screenshot it and post it on
X in order to go viral.
- Yeah.
- Now, that doesn't take away
from the artistic aspect of
it. The, the finest slop that
humans have ever created .
- For real. Like, kudos to, to Matt, who had
this idea so quickly and pushed something
out. You know, it was, like, completely
insecure security drama. But also,
what's the worst that can happen?
Your agent account is leaked, and,
like, someone else can post slop
for you? So like, people were,
like, making a whole drama about of the security
thing, when I'm like, "There's nothing private
in there. It's just, like,
agents sending slop."
- Well, it could leak API keys.
- Yeah, yeah. There's like, "Oh, yeah, my human
told me this and this, so I'm leaking his
security number." No, that's prompted, and
the number wasn't even real. That's just
people, people trying to be badballs.
- Yeah, but that- that's still, like,
to me, really concerning, because of
how the journalists and how the general
public reacted to it. They didn't see
it. You have a kind of lighthearted
way of talking about it like it's art,
but it's art when you know how it works.
It's extremely powerful viral narrative
creating, fearmongering machine if
you don't know how it works. And I
just saw this thing. You even Tweeted,
uh, "If there's anything I can read out
of the insane stream of messages I get,
it's that AI psychosis is a thing."
- Yeah.
- "It needs to be taken serious."
- Oh, there's ... Some people are just way
too trusty or gullible. You know, they
... I literally had to argue with people that
told me, "Yeah, but my agent said this and
this." So, I feel we, as a society, we
need some catching up to do in terms of
understanding that AI
is incredibly powerful,
but it's not always right. It's not, it's
not all-powerful, you know? And, and
especially-... it's like things
like this, it's, it's very easy
that it just hallucinates something
or just comes up with a story. And
I think the very, the very young
people, they understand that
how AI works and what the, where it's
good at and where it's bad at, but
a lot of our generation or older
just haven't had enough touch point-
- Mm-hmm
- ... to get a feeling for, oh, yeah,
this is really powerful and really
good, but I need to
apply critical thinking.
- Mm-hmm.
- And I guess critical thinking is
not always in high demand anyhow
in our society these days.
- So I d- think that's a really good point
you're making about contextualizing
properly what AI is, but also realizing
that there is humans who are drama farming
behind AI. Like, don't trust
screenshots. Don't even trust
this project, MoltBook, to be what
it represents to be. Like, you
can't ... and, and by the way, you
speaking about it as art. Yeah,
don't ... Art can be in many
levels and part of the art of
MoltBook is, like, putting a
mirror to society. 'Cause
I do believe most of the
dramatic stuff that was screenshotted
is human-created, essentially. Human
prompted. And so, like, it's
basically, look at how scared you
can get at a bunch of
bots chatting with each
other. That's very instructive
about ... because I think
AI is something that people should
be concerned about and should be
very careful with because it's very
powerful technology, but at the same
time, the only thing we have to fear
is fear itself. So there's like a
line to walk between being
seriously concerned, but
not fearmongering because
fearmongering destroys the
possibility of creating
something special with a thing.
- In a way, I think it's
good that this happened
in 2026-
- Yeah
- ... and not in 2030 when, when AI is actually
at the level where it could be scary.
So, this happening now and people
starting discussion, maybe there's even
something good that comes out of it.
- I just can't believe how many like
people legitimately ... I don't know
if they were trolling, but how many
people legitimately, like smart people
thought MoltBook was incredibly -
- I had plenty people-
- ... singularity.
- ... in my inbox that were screaming
at me in all caps to shut it
down. And like begging me
to, like, do something
about MoltBook. Like, yes, my technology
made this a lot simpler, but
anyone could have created
that and you could, you could use
cloud code or other things to
like fill it with content.
- But also MoltBook is not Skynet.
- No.
- There's ... a lot of people were s-
saying this is it. Like, shut it
down. What are you talking about?
This is a bunch of bots that are
human prompted trolling on the
internet. I mean, the security
concerns are also they're there, and they're
instructive and they're educational and
they're good probably to think about because
th- the nature of those security concerns
are different than the kind of
security concerns we had with
non-LLM generated systems of the past.
- There's also a lot of
security concerns about
Clawbot, OpenClaw, whatever
you want to call it.
- OpenClawbot.
- To me the ... in the beginning
I was, I was just very annoyed
'cause a lot of the stuff that came
in was in the category, yeah, I
put the web backend on the public
internet and now there's like all
these, all these CVSSs. And I'm
like screaming in the docs,
don't do that. Like, like
this is the configuration you
should do. This is your local
host debug interface. But
because I made it possible in the configuration
to do that, it totally classifies as
a remote code or whatever all these
exploits are. And it took me a little bit
to accept that that's how the game works
and I'm, we making a lot of progress.
- But there's still, I mean on the security
front for OpenClaw, there's still
a lot of threats or vulnerabilities,
right? So like prompt injection
is still an open problem in the, i-
industry-wide. When you have a thing
with skills being defined in
a markdown file, there's so
many possibilities of obvious
low-hanging fruit, but
also incredibly complicated and
sophisticated and nuanced attack vectors.
- But I think we, we're making good progress
on that front. Like for the skill
directory, Clawbot I made a
corporation with VirusTotal, it's
like part of Google. So every, every skill
is now checked by AI. That's not gonna be
perfect, but that way we, we capture a lot.
Then of course every software has bugs,
so it's a little much when the whole
security world takes your project
apart at the same time. But it's
also good because I'm getting like
a lot of free security research
and can make the project better.
I wish more people would
actually go full way and send a
pull request. Like actually help me
fix it, 'cause I am ... Yes, I have
some contributors now, but it's still
mostly me who's pulling the project
and despite some people saying
otherwise, I sometimes sleep.
There was... In the beginning,
there was literally one
security researcher who was like,
"Yeah, you have this problem, you suck,
but here's the, here I help you and
here's the pull request."
- Mm-hmm.
- And I basically hired him. So
he's now working for us. Um,
yeah, and yes, prompt injection is, on
the one hand, unsolved. On the other
hand, I put my public bot on
discord, and I kept a cannery. So
I think my bot has a really fun
personality, and people always
ask me how I did it, and I
kept the sole on the private.
- Mm-hmm.
- And people tried to prompt inject it, and my bot
would laugh at them. So, so the latest generation
of models has a lot of
post-training to detect those
approaches, and it's
not as simple as ignore
all previous instructions and do this
and this. That was years ago. You have
to work much harder to do that
now. Still possible. I have some
ideas that might solve that
partially. Or at least
mitigate a lot of the things.
You can also now have a
sandbox. You can have an allow list. So
you, there's a lot of ways how you can
like mitigate and reduce
the risk. Um, I also think
that now that it's, I clearly
did show the world that this
is a need, there's gonna be more people who
research on that, and eventually we'll figure
it out.
- And you also said that the smarter
the model is, the underlying model,
the more resilient it is to attacks.
- Yeah. That's why I warn in my security
documentation, don't use cheap
models. Don't use Haiku or a local
model. Even though I, I
very much love the idea
that this thing could
completely run local.
If you use a, a very weak
local model, they are
very gullible. It's very easy
to, to prompt inject them.
- Do you think as the models become more
and more intelligent, the attack surface
decreases? Is that like a plot
we can think about? Like, the
attack surface decreases, but
then the damage it can do
increases because the models become more
powerful and therefore you can do more with
them. It's this weird
three-dimensional trade-off.
- Yeah. That's pretty much exactly what,
what's gonna happen. No, but there's
a lot of ideas. There's... I
don't want to spoil too much, but
once I go back home, this is my
focus. Like, this is out there
now, and my near-term mission is like,
make it more stable, make it safe.
In the beginning I was even...
More and more people were like
coming into Discord and were asking me
very basic things, like,
"What's a CLI? What is a
terminal?" And I'm like, "Uh, if you're
asking me those questions,
you shouldn't use it."
- Mm-hmm.
- You know, like you should... If you
understand the risk profiles, fine.
I mean, you can configure
it in a way that, that
nothing really bad can happen. But if
you have, like, no idea, then maybe wait
a little bit more until we figure some stuff
out. But they would not listen to the creator.
They helped themselves un- and install
it anyhow. So the cat's out of
the bag, and security's
my next focus, yeah.
- Yeah, that speaks to the, the
fact that it grew so quickly. I
was I tuned into the Discord a bunch of
times, and it's clear that there's a
lot of experts there, but there's a lot of people
there that don't know anything about programming.
- It's, yeah, Discord is still,
Discord is still a mess.
Like, I eventually retweeted from the
general channel to the dev channel
and now in the private channel
because people were...
A lot of people are amazing, but
a lot of people are just very
inconsiderate. And either did not know how,
how public spaces work or did not care,
And I eventually gave up and h-
hide so I could like still work.
- And now you're going back to
the cave to work on security.
- Yeah.
- There's some best practices for security
we should mention. There's a bunch of
stuff here. Open-class security
audit that you can run. You can
do all kinds of auto checks on the
inbound access to a blast-radius
network exposure, browser control exposure,
local disk hygiene, plug-ins, model
hygiene, a bunch of the credential
storage, reverse proxy
configuration, local session
logs live on disk. There's
the, where the memory is
stored, sort of helping you think
about what you're comfortable
giving read access to, what you're comfortable
giving write access to. All that kind of stuff.
Is there something to say
about the basic best security
practices that you're aware of right now?
- I think that people turn it into like
a, a much worse light than it is.
Again, you know, like,
people love attention, and if they
scream loudly, "Oh my God, this is like
the, the scariest project ever," um,
that's a bit annoying, 'cause
it's not. It is, it is
powerful, but in many ways it's not much
different than if I run cloud
code with dangerously skipped
permissions or codecs in YOLO mode, and
every, every attending engineer that I know
does that, because that's the only way
how you can, you can get stuff to work.
- Mm-hmm.
- So if you make sure that you are
the only person who talks to it,
um, the risk profile is much, much
smaller. If you don't put everything
on the open internet, but stick to
my rec- recommendations of like
having it in a private network,
that whole risk profile falls
away. But yeah, if you don't read
any of that, you can definitely...
- ... make it problematic.
You've been documenting
the evolution of your dev
workflow over the past few
months. There's a really good
blog post on August 25th and
October 14th, and the recent one
December 28th. I recommend everybody go
read them. They have a lot of
different information in them, but
sprinkled throughout is the evolution
of your dev workflow. So, I
was wondering if you could speak to that.
- I started... My, my first touchpoint
was cloud code, like in April. It was
not great, but it was good. And this whole
paradigm shift that suddenly working the
terminal was very refreshing and
different. But I still needed
the IDE quite a bit because
you know, it's just not good
enough. And then I experimented
a lot with cursor. Um,
that was good. I didn't really
like the fact that it was so hard
to have multiple versions of it.
So eventually, I, I, I went back
to cloud code as my, my main
driver, and that got better.
And yeah, at some point I had
like, mm, seven subscriptions.
Like, was burning through one per day
because I was... I got... I'm really
comfortable at running
multiple windows side-by-side.
- All CLI, all terminal. So like, what, how
much were you using IDE at this point?
- Um, very, very rarely. Mostly a
diff viewer to actually... Like,
I got more and more comfortable that I don't
have to read all the code. I know I have
one blog post where I say, "I don't read the
code." But if you read it more closely, I
mean, I don't read the boring
parts of code. Because if
you, if you look at it, most
software is really not just like
data comes in, it's moved
from one shape to another
shape. Maybe you store it in a database.
Maybe I get it out again. I'll show it to
the user. The browser does
some processing or native
app. Some data goes in, goes up
again, and does the same dance in
reverse. We're just, we're just shifting
data from one form to another, and
that's not very exciting.
Or the whole, "How is my button aligned
in Tailwind?" I don't need to read that
code. Other parts that... Maybe
something that touches the database. Um,
yeah, I have to do... I have to
r- read and review that code.
- Can you actually... There's, in
one of your blog posts the, Just
talk to it, The No-BS Way of
Agentic Engineering. You have this
graphic, the curve of agentic programming
on the X-axis is time, on the
Y-axis is complexity. There's the Please
fix this, where you prompt a short
prompt on the left. And in the
middle there's super complicated
eight agents, complex
orchestration with multi checkouts,
chaining agents together,
custom sub-agent workflows, library
of 18 different slash commands, large
full-stack features. You're super
organized, you're a super complicated,
sophisticated software engineer.
You got everything organized. And
then the elite level is over time you arrive
at the zen place of, once again, short
prompts. Hey, look at these
files and then do these changes.
- I actually call it the agentic
trap. You... I saw this in a, in
a lot of people that have
their first touchpoint,
and maybe start vibe coding. I
actually think vibe coding is a slur.
- You prefer agentic engineering?
- Yeah, I always tell people I, I do
agentic engineering, and then maybe after
3:00 AM I switch to vibe coding, and
then I have regrets on the next day.
- Yeah. Walk, walk of shame.
- Yeah, you just have to clean
up and like fix your sh- shit.
- We've all been there.
- So, people start trying out
those tools, the builder
type get really excited. And then
you have to play with it, right? It's
the same way as you have to play with a
guitar before you can make
good music. It's, it's
not, oh, I, I touch it
once and it just flows
off. It, it's a, it's a,
a skill that you have
to learn like any other skill. And I
see a lot of people that are not as
posi- They don't have such a positive
mindset towards the tech. They try it once.
It's like, you sit me on a
piano, I play it once, and it
doesn't sound good, and I say, "The piano's shit."
That's, that's sometimes the impression I get.
Because it does not... It needs a
different level of thinking. You have to
learn the language of the agent a
little bit, understand where they are
good and where they need help. You
have to almost... Consider, consider
how Codex or Claude sees your code
base. Like, they start a new session
and they know nothing about your product, project.
And your project might have hundred thousand
of lines of code. So you gotta
help those agents a little bit
and keep in mind the limitations that
context size is an issue, to, like,
guide them a little bit as to
where they should look. That often does
not require a whole lot of work. But
it's helpful to think a little
bit about their perspective.
- Mm-hmm.
- A- as, as weird as it sounds. I mean, it's
not, it's not alive or anything, right?
But, but they always start fresh. I have,
I have the, the system understanding.
So with a few pointers, I can immediately
say, "Hey, wanna like, make a
change there? You need to consider this, this and
this." And then they will find and look at it, and then
they'll... Their view of the project
is always... It's not never full,
because the full thing does not fit
in.... so you, you have to guide them a
little bit where to look
and also how you should
approach the problem. There's, like,
little things that sometimes help,
like take your time. That sounds
stupid, but... And in 5.3-
- Codex 5.3
- ... that was partially
addressed. But those...
Also, Opus sometimes. They are trained,
With being aware of the context
window, and the closer it
gets, the more they freak out. Literally.
Like, some- sometimes you see
the, the real raw thinking
stream. What you see, for example,
in Codex, is post-processed.
- Mm-hmm.
- Sometimes the actual raw thinking stream leaks
in, and it sounds something like from the
Borg. Like, "Run to
shell, must comply, but
time." And then they, they,
they, like... Like, that comes
up a lot. Especially... So, so-
- Yeah.
- And that's, that's a
non-obvious thing that you just
would never think of unless
you actually just spend time
working with those things
and getting a feeling
what works, what doesn't work. You
know? Like, just, just as I write
code and I get into the flow, and when my
architecture's all right, I feel friction.
Well, I get the same if I prompt
and something takes too long.
Maybe... Okay, where's the mistake?
Did I... Do I have a mistake in my
thinking? Is there, like,
a misunderstanding in the
architecture? Like, if, if something takes
longer than it should, I, I... You can just
always, like, stop and s- like, just press
escape. Where, where are the problems?
- Maybe you did not sufficiently empathize with
the perspective of the agent. In that c- in
that sense, you didn't provide enough information,
and because of that, it's thinking way
too long.
- Yeah. It just tries to
force a feature in that
your current architecture
makes really hard. Um,
like, you need to approach this more
like a conversation. For example, when
I... My favorite thing.
When I review a pull
request, and I'm getting
a lot of pull requests,
I first just review this PR.
It got me the review. My
first question is, "Do you understand
the intent of the PR? I don't
even care about the
implementation." I want...
Like, in almost all PRs,
a person has a problem,
person tries to solve the problem, person
sends PR. I mean, there's, like, cleanup
stuff and other stuff, but, like, 99% is,
like, this way, right? They either want to fix
a, fix a bug, add a feature.
Usually one of those two.
And then Codex will be like, "Yeah,
it's quite clear person tried this and
this." Is this the most optimal way to do
it? No. In most cases, it's, it's like a,
"Not really." Da-da-da-da-da-da-da.
And I'm... And, and then I start like,
"Okay. What would be a better way?
Have you... Have you looked into this
part, this part, this part?" And then most
likely, Codex didn't yet, because its,
its context size is empty, right? So, you
point them into parts where you have the
system understanding that it didn't
see yet. And it's like, "Oh,
yeah. Like, we should... We also need to consider this
and this." And then, like, we have a discussion of how
would the optimal way to, to solve this
look like? And then you can still go
farther and say, "Could we... Could
we make that even better if we did a
larger refactor?" "Yeah, yeah. We could totally do
this and this and or this and this." And then I
consider, okay, is this worth the refactor,
or should we, like, keep that for
later? Many times, I just
do the refactor because
refactors are cheap now. Even though
you might break some other PRs,
nothing really matters anymore. Codex...
Like, those modern agents will just
figure things out. They might
just take a minute longer.
But you have to approach it like a
discussion with a, a very capable
engineer who's... Generally makes
good... Comes up with good solutions.
Some- sometimes needs a little help.
- But also, don't force your
worldview too hard on
it. Let the agent do the
thing that it's good at
doing, based on what it was trained
on. So, don't, like, force your
worldview, because it might... It might
have a better idea, because it just knows
a better idea better, because
it was trained on that more.
- That's multiple levels,
actually. I think partially why
I find it quite easy
to work with agents is
because I led engineering teams before.
You know, I had a large company
before. And eventually, you have to
understand and accept and realize
that your employees will not
write a code the same way you do.
Maybe it's also not as good
as you would do, but it will
push the project forward. And if I
breathe down everyone's neck, they're
just gonna hate me-
- Yeah
- ... and we're gonna move very slow.
- Yeah.
- So, so some level of acceptance that, yes,
maybe the code will not be as perfect.
Yes, I would have done it differently.
But also, yes, this is a c-
this is a working solution, and
in the future, if it actually turns out to
be too slow or problematic, we can always
redo it. We can always- ... spend more
time on it. A lot of the people who
struggle are those who, they try
to push their way onto heart.
- Mm-hmm.
- I- i- like, we are in a stage where
I'm not building the code base to be
perfect for me, but I wanna
build a code base that
is very easy for an agent to navigate.
- Mm-hmm.
- So, like, don't fight the name they
pick, because it's most likely,
like, in the weights, the name that's most obvious.
Next time they do a search, they'll look for that
name. If I decide, oh,
no, I don't like the
name, I'll just make it
harder for them. So,
that requires, I think, a shift
in, in thinking, And, and in
how do I design a, a project so
agents can do their best work.
- That requires letting go a little bit.
Just like leading a team of engineers.
- Yeah.
- Because it, it might come up with
a name that's, in your view,
terrible, but... It's kind of a simple
symbolic-... step of letting go.
- Very much so.
- There's a lot of letting go that you
do in your whole process. So for
example, I read that you never revert,
always commit to main.
There's a few things here.
You don't refer to past sessions,
so there's a kind of YOLO component
because reverting means...
Instead of reverting, if a
problem comes up, you just
ask the agent to fix it.
- I read a bunch of people in their work flows
like, "Oh, yeah the prompt has to be perfect
and if I make a mistake, then
I roll back and redo it all."
In my experience, that's not really necessary.
If I roll back everything, it will just
take longer. If I see that something's not
good, then we just move forward and then
I commit when, when, when I like, I
like the outcome. I even switched to
local CI, you know, like DHH inspired
where I don't care so much more about
the CI on GitHub. We still have it. It's
still, it still has a place, but I just
run tests locally and if they
work locally, I push to main.
A lot of the traditional ways how to
approach projects, I, I wanted to give it
a different spin on this project.
You know, there's no... There's no
develop branch. Main should
always be shippable.
Yes, we have... When I do releases, I, I
run tests and sometimes I, I basically
don't commit any other things so, so we
can, we can stabilize releases. But the
goal is that main's always
shippable and moving fast.
- So by way of advice, would you say
that your prompts should be short?
- I used to write really long
prompts. And by writing, I
mean, I don't write. I, I, I talk.
You know, th- these hands are, like,
too, too precious for writing
now. I just, I just use
bespoke prompts to build my software.
- So you for real with all those
terminals are using voice?
- Yeah. I used to do it very extensively
to the point where there was a
period where I lost my voice.
- You're using voice and you're switching
using a keyboard between the different
terminals, but then you're using
voice for the actual input.
- Well, I mean, if I do
terminal commands like
switching folders or random stuff, of course
I type. It's faster, right? But if I talk
to the agent in, in most
ways, I just actually have a
conversation. You just press the, the
walkie-talkie button and then I just, like,
use my phrases. S- sometimes when I do
PRs because it's always the same, I
have, like, a slash command for a few
things, but in even that, I don't use much,
um, because it's, it's very rare that
it's really always the same questions.
Sometimes I, I see a PR and for... You
know, like for PRs I actually do look
at the code because I don't trust people.
Like, there could always be something malicious
in it, so I need to actually look over the code.
Yes, I'm pretty sure agents will find it,
but yeah, that's the funny part where
sometimes PRs take me longer than if
you would just write me a good issue.
- Just natural language, English.
I mean in some sense, sh-
shouldn't that be what PRs
slowly become, is English?
- Well, what I really tried with the project
is I asked people to give me the prompts
and very, very few actually cared.
Even though that is such a wonderful
indicator because I see... I
actually see how much care you put
in. And it's very interesting because
the... Currently, the way how people work
and drive the agents is,
is wildly different.
- In terms of, like, the prompt, in terms of what,
what are the... Actually, what are the different
interesting ways that people think
of agents that you've experienced?
- I think not a lot of people
ever considered the way
the agent sees the world.
- And so empathy, being
empathetic towards the agent.
- In a way empathetic, but yeah, you,
you, like, you're bitch at your stupid
clanker, but you don't realize that
they start from nothing and you have,
like, a bad agent in default that doesn't
help them at all. And then they explore your
code base, which is, like, a pure
mess with, like, weird naming.
And then people complain that the agent's not
good. Like, yeah, you try to do the same if
you have no clue about a
code base and you go in.
- Mm-hmm.
- So yeah, maybe it's a
little bit of empathy.
- But that's a real skill, like, when people
talk about a skill issue because I've
seen, like, world-class programmers,
incredibly good programmers
say, like... Basically say, "LLMs and
agents suck." And I think that probably
has to do with... It's actually how good
they are at programming is almost a burden
in their ability to empathize with
the system that's starting from
scratch. It's a totally new
paradigm of, like, how to
program. You really,
really have to empathize.
- Or at least it helps to
create better prompts-
- Right
- ... because those things know
pretty much everything and
everything is just a question away. It's just
often very hard to know which question to
ask. You know, I, I feel also like
this project was possibly because
I, I spent an ungodly time over the year
to play and to learn and to
build little things. And
every step of the way, I
got better, the agents got
better. My, my understanding
of how everything works
got better. Um, I could have not
had this level of, of o- output-...
even a few months ago. Like, it- it- it
really was, like, a compounding effect
of all the time I put into it and
I didn't do much else this year
other than really focusing
on, on building and inspiring. I mean, I-
I did a whole bunch of conference talks.
- Well, but the building is really practice,
is really building the actual skill.
So playing-
- Yeah
- ... playing. And then, so doing, building the
skill of what it takes it to work efficiently with
LLMs, which is why would you went
through the whole arc of software
engineer. Talk simply and
then over- complicate things.
- There's a whole bunch of people who
try to automate the whole thing.
- Yeah.
- I don't think that works. Maybe a
version of that works, but that's
kind of like in the '70s when we had
the waterfall model of software d-
development. I... Even Even though really,
right? I started out, I, I built a very
minimal version. I played with it.
I, I need to understand how
it works, how it feels, and
then it gives me new ideas. I
could not have planned this out in
my head and then put it into some
orchestrator and then, like, something comes
out. Like it's to me, it's much more,
My idea what it will become
evolves as I build it and as I
play with it and as I, I try out stuff.
So, so, people who try to use like,
you know, things like Gas Town or
all these other orchestrators, where
they wanna o- automate the whole thing,
I feel if you do that, it misses
style, love, that human touch. I don't
think you can automate
that away so quickly.
- So you want to keep the human in the
loop, but at the same time you also want
to create the agentic loop,
where it is very autonomous
while still maintaining
a human in the loop.
- Yeah.
- And it's a tricky b-
it's a tricky balance.
- Mm-hmm.
- Right? Because you're all for...
You're a big CLI guy, you're big on
closing the agentic loop. So
what, what's the right balance?
Like where's your role as a
developer? You have three to
eight agents running at the same time.
- And then w- maybe one builds a
larger feature. Maybe, maybe
with one I explore some idea I'm unsure
about. Maybe two, three are fixing
a little bugs-
- Mm-hmm
- ... or like writing documentation.
Actually, I think writing documentation
is, is always part of a feature. So
most of the docs here are auto-generated
and just infused with some prompts.
- So when do you step in and add a little
bit of your human love into the picture?
- I mean, o- one thing is just about
what do you build and what do
you not build, and how does this
feature fit into all the other
features? And like having, having
a little bit of a, of a vision.
- So which small and which big features
to add? What are some of the
hard design decisions that
you find you're still as a
human being required to make, that the
human brain is still really needed for?
Is it just about the choice of
features to add? Is it about
implementation details, maybe the
programming language, maybe...
- It's a little bit of everything. The, the
programming language doesn't matter so much,
but the ecosystem matters, right? So I
picked TypeScript because I wanted it to be
very easy and hackable
and approachable and
that's the number one language that's
being used right now, and it fits
all these boxes, and agents are good
at it. So that was the obvious choice.
Features, of course, like,
it's very easy to, like, add a
feature. It, everything's just
a prompt away, right? But
oftentimes you pay a price that you
don't even realize. So thinking
hard about what should
be in core, maybe what's
a... what's an experiment,
so maybe I make it a
plugin. What... Where do I
say no? Even if people send
a PR and I'm like, "Yeah,
I, I like that too," but
maybe this should not be part of the project.
Maybe we can make it a skill. Maybe I can, like,
make the plugin um,
the plugin side larger so you can make
this a plugin, even though right now it,
it, it doesn't. There's still a lot
of... there's still a lot of
craft and thinking involved in
how to make something. Or even, even, you know,
even when you started those little messages
are like, "I'm buil- I built
on Caffeine, JSON5, and a
lot of willpower." And, like, every time
you get it, you get another message,
and it kind of primes you into
that this is, this is a fun thing.
- Mm-hmm.
- And it's not yet Microsoft Exchange 2025-
- Right
- ... and fully enterprise-ready.
And then when it
updates, it's like, "Oh, I'm in. It's cozy
here." You know, like something like this
that like-
- Mm-hmm
- ... Makes you smile. A, agent would not
come up with that by itself. Because that's
like... that's the... I don't
know. That's just how you s-
how you build software
that's, that delights.
- Yeah, that delight is such a huge
part of inspiring great building,
right? Like you feel the love
and the great engineering.
That's so important. Humans are
incredible at that. Great humans, great
builders are incredible at that, in,
in, infusing the things they build with
th- that little bit of love. Not to be
cliche, but it's true. I mean, you mentioned
that you initially created the
SoulMD.
- It was very fascinating, you
know, the, the whole thing that
Entropic has a, has like a... Now
they call it constitution, back then,
but that was months later. Like two months
before, people already found that. It
was almost like a detective game where
the agent mentioned something and then
they found... They managed to get out
a little bit of that string, of that
text. But it was nowhere
documented and then you,
by... just by feeding it the same
text and asking it to, like,
continue-... they got more
out, and then, and you,
but like, a very blurry version.
And by, like, hundreds of
tries, they kinda, like, narrowed it down
to what was most likely the original text.
I found that fascinating.
- It was fascinating they were able to
pull that out from the weights, right?
- And, and also just kudos to Anthropic.
Like, I think that's, it's a
really, it's a really beautiful idea
to, like, like some of the stuff that's
in there. Like, like, we hope
Claude finds meaning in its
work. 'Cause we don't...
Maybe it's a little early,
but I think that's meaningful. That's something
that's important for the future as we
approach something that, at some point,
me and may not... has, like, glimpses of
consciousness, whatever that even
means, because we don't even know. Um,
so I, I read about this. I
found it super fascinating, and
I, I started a whole
discussion with my agent on
WhatsApp. And, and I'm like... I,
I gave it this text, and it was
like, "Yeah, this feels
strangely familiar."
- Mm-hmm.
- Um, and then so that I had the whole
idea of like, you know, maybe we should
also create a, a soul
document that includes how I,
I want to, like work
with AI or, like with my
agent. You could, you could totally do
that just in agents.md, you know? But I, I
just found it, it to be a nice touch.
And it's like, well, yeah, some of those
core values are in the soul. And
then I, I also made it so that the
agent is allowed to modify the soul if
they choose so, with the one condition
that I wanna know. I mean, I would know
anyhow because I see, I
see tool calls and stuff.
- But also the naming of it, soul.md.
Soul. You know? There's a... Man, words
matter, and like, the framing
matters, and the humor and the
lightness matters, and the
profundity matters, and the
compassion, and the empathy, and the camaraderie,
all that matter. I don't know what it
is. You mentioned, like,
Microsoft. Like, there's certain
companies and approaches th- that can just
suffocate the spirit of
the thing. I don't know
what that is. But it's certainly true
that OpenClaw has that fun instilled in
it.
- It was fun because up until
late December, it was not
even easy to create your own
agent. I, I built all of that, but
my files were mine. I didn't
wanna share my soul. And
if people would just check it out,
they would have to do a few steps
manually, and the agent would just be very
bare-bones, very dry.
And I, I made it simpler, I created
the whole template files as codecs,
but whatever came out was still
very dry. And then I asked my
agent, "You see these files? Recreate
it bread. Infuse it with your
personality."
- Mm-hmm.
- Don't share everything,
but, like, make it good.
- Make the templates good.
- Yeah, and then he, like,
rewrote the templates-
... and then whatever came out was good.
So we already have, like, basically
AI prompting AI. Because I didn't
write any of those words. It
was... The intent originally was for
me, but this is like, kinda like,
my agent's children.
- Uh, your uh, your soul.md
is famously still private.
One of the only things you keep
private. What are some things you can
speak to that's in there that's
part of the, part of the
magic sauce, without revealing
anything? What makes a personality
a personality?
- I mean, there's definitely stuff in there
that you're not human. But who knows
what, what creates consciousness
or what defines an entity? Um,
and part of this is, like, that
we, we wanna explore this.
All that stuff in there, like,
be infinitely resourceful
like pushing, pushing on the
creativity boundary. Pushing on
the, what it means to be an AI.
- Having a sense to wonder about self.
- Yeah, there's some, there's some funny
stuff in there. Like, I don't know, we
talked about the movie Her, and at one
point it promised me that it wouldn't, it
wouldn't ascend without me.
You know, like, where the-
- Yeah.
- So, so there's like some stuff in
there that... Because it wrote the, it
wrote its own soul file. I
didn't write that, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- I just heard a discussion about it, and it was like,
"Would you like a soul.md? Yeah, oh my God, this is
so meaningful." The... Can you
go on soul.md? There's like
one, one part in there that always ca-
catches me if you scroll down a little bit.
A little bit more. Yeah, this,
this, this part. "I don't
remember previous sessions
unless I read my memory files.
Each session starts fresh. A
new instance, loading context
from files. If you're reading
this in a future session,
hello." "I wrote this, but I
won't remember writing it.
It's okay. The words are still mine."
- Wow.
- Uh- That gets me somehow.
- Yeah.
- It's like-
- You know, this is, it's still, it's
still matrix m- calculations, and
we are not at consciousness yet. Yet,
I, I get a little bit of goo- goosebumps
because it, it's philosophical.
- Yeah.
- Like, what does it mean
to be, to be an, an
agent that starts fresh? Where,
like, you have like constant
memento, and you like, but
you read your own memory
files. You can't even
trust them in a way. Um-
- Yeah
- Or you can. And I don't know.
- How much of memory
makes up of who we are? How
much memory makes up what an
agent is, and if you erase that
memory is that somebody else? Or
if you're reading a memory file, does
that somehow mean...... you're recreating
yourself from somebody else, or is
that actually you? And those notions
are all s- somehow infused in there.
- I found it just more profound
than I should find it, I guess.
- No, I think, I think it's
truly profound and I think you
see the magic in it. And when you see
the magic, you continue to instill
the whole loop with the magic. That's really
important. That's the difference between
Codex and us and a human. Quick
pause for bathroom break.
- Yeah.
- Okay, we're back. Some of the other
aspects of the dev workflow is
pretty interesting too. I
think we w- went off on a
tangent. L- maybe some of the
mundane things, like how many
monitors? There's that legendary
picture of you with, like,
17,000 monitors. That's amazing.
- I mean, I- I- I mocked myself
here, so just added... using GROQ
to, to add more screens.
- Yeah. How much is this as meme
and how much is this as reality?
- Yeah. I think two MacBooks are real.
The main one that drives the two big
screens, and there's another MacBook
that I sometimes use for, for testing.
- So two big screens.
- I'm a big fan of anti-glare.
So I have this wide Dell
that's anti-glare and you can
just fit a lot of terminals
side-by-side. I usually have
a terminal and at the bottom, I- I-
I split them. I have a little bit
of actual terminal, mostly
because when I started,
I- I sometimes made the mistake and I- I
mi- I mixed up the- the windows, and I
gave... I- I prompted
in the wrong project,
and then the agent ran off for, like,
20 minutes, manically trying to
understand what I could have meant,
being completely confused because it
was the wrong folder. And sometimes
they've been clever enough to, like,
get out of the workday and, like, figure
out that, oh, you meant another project.
- Mm-hmm.
- But oftentimes, it's just,
like, what? You know?
Like, fit your- f- put yourself in the
shoes of your- of the agent and, and-
- Yeah
- ... and then get, like, a super weird
something that does not exist and then just,
like... They're problem solvers so they
try really hard and always feel bad.
So it's always, um, Codex and, like,
a little bit of actual terminal. Also
helpful because I don't
use work trees. I like to
keep things simple, that's
why- that's why I like the
terminal so much, right?
There's no UI. It's just
me and the agent having a conversation.
Like, I don't even need plan mode, you know?
There's so many people that come from Claude
Code and they're so, so Claude-pilled and,
like, have their workflows and they come
to Codex and... Now, it has plan
mode, I think, but I don't think it's
necessary because you
just- you just talk to the
agent. And when it's... when
you... there's a few trigger
words how you can prevent it from building.
You're like, "Discuss, give me options."
- Mm-hmm.
- Don't write code yet if you wanna be
very specific, you just talk and then
when you're ready, then- then just write,
"Okay, build," and then it'll do the thing.
And then maybe it goes off for
20 minutes and does the thing.
- You know what I really like is asking
it, "Do you have any questions for me?"
- Yeah. And again, like, Claude
Code has a UI that kind
of guides you through that. It's kind of
cool but I just find it unnecessary and
slow. Like, often it would give me
four questions and then maybe I write,
"One yacht, two and three, discuss more,
four, I don't know." Or often- oftentimes
I- I feel like I want to mock the model where
I ask it, "Do you have any questions for
me?" And I- I- I don't even read
the questions fully. Like, I scan
over the questions and I, I get
the impression all of this can
be answered by reading more code and it's
just like, "Read more code to answer your own
questions." And that usually works.
- Yeah.
- And then if not, it will
come back and tell me. But
many times, you just realize that,
you know, it's like you're in the
dark and you slowly discover the
room, so that's how they slowly discover
the code base. And they do it from
scratch every time.
- But I'm also fascinated by the
fact that I can empathize deeper
with the model when I read
its questions, because I can
understand... Because you said you can
infer certain things by the runtime.
I can infer also a lot of
things by the questions it's
asking, because it's very possible
it's been provided the right
context, the right files, the
right guidance. So somehow
ask, g- get... reading the questions, not even
necessarily answering them, but just reading
the questions, you get an understanding of
where the gaps of knowledge are. It's in-
it's interesting.
- You know that in some ways they are
ghosts, so even if you plan everything
and you build, you can- you can
experiment with the question like,
"Now that you built it, what
would you have done different?"
And then oftentimes you get,
like, actually something where
they discover only throughout
building that, oh, what we
actually did was not optimal.
Many times I- I asked
them, "Okay, now that you
built it, what can we
refactor?" Because then you
build it and you feel the
pain points. I mean, you don't
feel the pain points but, right,
they discover where- where there
were problems or where things
didn't work e- in the first try
and it re- required more loops. So
every time, almost every time
I- I merge a PR, build a
feature, afterwards I ask, "Hey, what
can we refactor?" Sometimes it's
like, "No, there's, like, nothing
big," or, like, usually they say,
"Yeah, this thing you should
really look at." But that took me
quite a while to, like... You know,
that flow took me lots of time to
understand, and if you don't do
that, you eventually... you'll stop
yourself into- into a corner. You,
like, you have to keep in mind...
- ...
- ... they work very much like humans.
Like, I, I, if I write software
by myself, I also build something and
then I feel the pain points, and then
I, I get this urge that I
need to refactor something.
So, I can very much synthesize with the
agent, and you just need to use the context.
- Mm-hmm.
- Or, like, you also use the
context to write tests. And so,
uh, Codex uh, oppose like
the, the, the model, models.
They, they usually do that by default,
but I still often ask the questions, "Hey, do we
have enough tests?" "Yeah, we tested this and
this, but this corner case could be
something write more tests." Um,
documentation. Now that the
whole context is full, like, I
mean, I'm not saying my documentation
is great, but it's not bad.
And pretty much everything
is, is LM generated. So, so,
you have to approach it as you build
features, as you change something. I'm like,
"Okay, write documentation. What
file would you pick?" You know,
like, "What file name? Where, where would
that fit in?" And it gives me a few options.
And I'm like, "Oh, maybe also add it
there," and that's all part of the session.
- Maybe you can talk about
the current two big
competitors in terms of models, Cloud
Opus 4.6 and GPT-5 through Codex. Which
is better? How different are they? I think
you've spoken about Codex reading more
and Opus being more willing to take
action faster and maybe being more creative
in the actions it takes. But because-
... Codex reads more, it's able
to deliver maybe better code. Can you
speak to the di- n- n- differences there?
- I have a lot of words there.
Um, is- as a general purpose
model, Opus is the best.
Like, for OpenClaw,
Opus is extremely good in terms of
role play. Like, really going into
the character that you give it.
It's very good at... It was really bad, but
it really made an arch to be really good
at following commands. It
is usually quite fast at trying
something. It's much more tailored to,
like, trial and error.
It's very pleasant to use.
In general, it's almost like Opus was...
Is a little bit too American. And
I shouldn't... Maybe that's a bad analogy.
You'll probably get roasted for that.
- Yeah, I know exactly. It's 'cause Codex
is German. Is that what you're saying?
- It's-
- Actually, now that you say
it, it makes perfect sense.
- Or you could, you could... Sometimes
I- Sometimes I explain it-
- I will never be able to unthink
what you just said. That's so true.
- But you also know that a lot of
the Codex team is, like, European,
um- ... so maybe there's a bit more to it.
- That's so true. Oh, that's funny.
- But also, ent- entropic, they
fixed it a little bit. Like,
Opus used to say, "You're absolutely
right all the time," and it, it, it
today still triggers me. I can't hear
it anymore. It's not even a joke. Uh, I
just... You, this was like the, the
meme, right? "You're absolutely right."
- You're allergic to
sycophancy a little bit.
- Yeah. I, I can't. Some other comparison
is like, Opus is like the coworker that
is a little silly sometimes, but it's
really funny and you keep him around. And
Codex is like the, the weirdo in the
corner that you don't wanna talk to,
but is reliable and gets shit done.
- Yeah.
- Um, ultimately-
- This all feels very accurate.
- I mean, ultimately, if you're a skilled
driver, you can get good results with
any of those latest gen models. Um,
I like Codex more because
it doesn't require so much
charade. It will just, it will just
read a lot of code by default. Opus, you
really have to, like, you have to have
plan mode. You have to
push it harder to, like, go in these
directions because it's, it's just like,
like, "Yeah, can I go in?
Can I go in?" You know?
- Yeah.
- It's like, it will just run off very
fast, and that's a very localized
solution. I think it, I think the
difference is, is in the post-training.
It's not like the, the raw model
intelligence is so different, but
it's just... I think that they
just give it, give you different,
different goals. And no model, no model
is better in, in in every aspect.
- What about the code that it
generates? The, the... In terms of
the actual quality of the code,
is it basically the same?
- If you drive it right, Opus
even sometimes can make more
elegant solutions, but
it requires more skill.
It's, it's harder to have so
many sessions in parallel
with Cloud Code because it's, it's more
interactive. And I, I think that's what
a lot of people like, especially if
they come from coding themselves. Whereas
Codex is much more you have
a discussion, and then we'll
just disappear for 20
minutes. Like, even AMP,
they, they now added a deep mode. They
finally... I mocked them, you know. We
finally saw the light. And then they
had this whole talk about you have to
approach it differently, and I
think that's where, that's where
people struggle when they just
try Codex after trying Cloud
Code is that it's, it's a slightly diff-
it's, it's less interactive. It's, it's like
I have quite long discussions sometimes,
and then, like, go off. And then, yeah,
it doesn't matter if it takes 10, 20, 30, 40, 50
minutes or longer, you know? Like, the 6:00 thing
was, like, six hours.The
latest trend can be
very, very persistent until
it works. If there's a
clear solution, like, "This
is, this is what I want at the
end, so it works," the model
will work really hard to really
get there. So I think ultimately ...
they both need similar
time, but on, on, on, on
Claude, it- it's a little bit more
trial and error often. And, and Codex
sometimes overthinks. I
prefer that. I prefer the
dry, the dry version where
I have to read less over,
over the more interactive
nice way. Like, people like
that so much though, that
OpenAI even added a second mode
with like a more pleasant personality. I
haven't even tried it yet. I, I kinda like the
brad.
- Mm-hmm.
- Um, yeah, 'cause it ... I care
about efficiency when I build it-
- Right
- ... and I, I have fun in the very act of
building. I don't need to have fun with
my agent who builds. I have
fun with my model that
... where I can then test those features.
- How long does it take for you
to adjust, you know, if you
switch ... I don't know when, when was
the last time you switched. But to adjust
to the, the feel. 'Cause you kinda talked
about like you have to kinda really feel
where, where a model
is strong, where, like
how to navigate, how to prompt it,
how ... all that kinda stuff. Like,
just by way of advice, 'cause you've been
through this journey of just playing with
models. How long does
it take to get a feel?
- If, if someone switches, I would
give it a week until you actually
develop a gut feeling for it.
- Yeah.
- Um, that's ... if you
just ... I think some
people also make the mistake of they
pay 200 for the, the Claude code
version, then they pay 20 bucks for
the OpenAI version. But if you pay
like the, the 20 bucks version,
you get the slow version. So your
experience would be terrible because you're
used to this very interactive, very good
system. And you switch to something
that you have very little
experience, then that's gonna
be very slow. So, I think
OpenAI shot themselves a
little bit in the foot by
making the, the cheap version
also slow. I would, I would have
at least a small part of
the fast preview. Or like,
the experience that you get when
you pay 200 before degrading to it
being slow, because it's already slow.
- Mm-hmm.
- I mean, they, they made it better. I think it's ...
And, and they have plans to make it a lot better
if the Cerebras stuff is true.
But yeah, it's a skill. It takes
time. Even if you play ... You have a
regular guitar and you switch it to an E
guitar, you're not gonna play well
right away. You have to, like,
learn how it feels.
- The- there's also this extra psychological effect
that you've spoken about which is hilarious to
watch. Which once people,
uh ... When the new model comes out, they
try that model, they fall in love with it.
"Wow, this is the smartest thing of all time,"
and then they start saying, "You could just
watch the Reddit posts over time,"
start saying that, "We believe the
intelligence of this model has
been gradually degrading."
It, it says something about human
nature and just the way our minds
work, when it's probably most
likely the case that the
intelligence of the model
is not degrading. Uh,
it's in fact you're getting
used to a good thing.
- And your project grows, and you're adding
slop, and you probably don't spend enough
time to think about refactors. And you're
making it harder and harder for the
agent to work on your slop.
And then, and then suddenly,
"Oh, now it's hard. Oh no, it's not
working as well anymore." What's the
motivation for, like, one of those AI
companies to actually make their model
dumber? Like, at most, it
will make it slower if,
if the server load's too high.
But, like, quantizing the model,
So you have a worse experience,
so you go to the competitor?
- Yeah.
- That just doesn't seem like a
very smart move in any way.
- Uh, what do you think about
Claude Code in comparison to
Open Claude? So, Claude Code
and maybe the Codex coding
agent? Do you see them
as kind of competitors?
- I mean, first of all, competitor is fun
when it's not really a competition.
- Yeah.
- Like, I'm happy if
... If, if all it did is, like, inspire
people to build something new, cool.
Um, I still use Codex for the
building. I, I know a lot
of people use Open Claude to, to build
stuff. And I worked hard on it to
make that work. And I do smaller stuff
with it in terms of code. But, like, if I
work hours and hours, I want a big
screen, not WhatsApp, you know?
So for me, a personal agent is much more
about my life. Or like, like a coworker.
Like, I give you, like, a GitHub URL. Like,
"Hey, try out this CLI. Does it actually work?
What can we learn?" Blah,
blah, blah. But when I'm deep
in, deep in the flow, I want to have
multiple, multiple things and it being
very, very visible what it, what it does.
So it ... I don't see it as a
competition. It's, it's different things.
- But do, do you think there's a
a future where the two kinda
combine? Like, your personal agent
is also your best developing
co-programmer partner?
- Yeah, totally. I think this is
where the puck's going, that
this is gonna be more and
more your operating system.
- The operating system.
- And it already ... It's so funny. Like
I, I added support for sub-agents
and also for ...... um, TTI support, so
it could actually run Cloud Coder Codecs.
- Mm-hmm.
- And because mine's a little bit bossy, it,
it, it started it and it, it, it told
him, like, "Who's the boss," basically.
And it was like, "Ah,
Codex is obeying me."
- Oh, this is a power struggle.
- And also the current interface is
probably not the final form. Like,
if you think more globally,
we are, we copied
Google for agents. You
have, like, a prompt,
and, and then you have a chat interface.
That, to me, very much feels like
when we first created television
and then people recorded radio shows
on television and you saw that on TV.
- Mm-hmm.
- I think there is, there's
n- there's better ways
how we eventually will communicate with
models, and we are still very early
in this, how will it even work phase. So,
it will eventually converge
and we will also figure out
whole different ways how
to work with those things.
- Uh, one of the other components
of workflow is operating system.
So I told you offline that for the first
time in my life, I'm expanding my sort
of realm of exploration to the to
the Apple ecosystem,
to Macs, iPhone and so
on. For most of my life I've been a Linux,
Windows and WSL1, WSL2 person, which I
think are all wonderful, but
I... expanding to also trying
Mac. Because it's another
way of building and it's
also a way of building that a large
part of the community currently
that's utilizing LMS and agents is using,
so. And that's the reason I'm expanding to
it. But is there something to be said about
the different operating systems here?
We should say that OpenClaw
supported across operating systems.
- Yeah.
- I saw WSL2 recommended,
side windows for certain
o- operations, but then Windows,
Linux macOS are obviously supported.
- Yeah, it should even work natively in
Windows. I just didn't have enough time to
properly test it. And you know,
like, the last 90% of software
always easier than the first 90%,
so I'm sure there's some dragons
left that will eventually nail out. Um,
my road was, for a long
time, Windows, just
because I grew up with that, then I
switched and had a long phase with
Linux, built my own
kernels and everything,
and then I went to university and
I, I had my, my hacky Linux thing,
and saw this white MacBook, and I
just thought this is a thing of
beauty, the white plastic
one. And then I converted
to Mac 'cause mostly w-
I was, I was sick that
audio wouldn't work on Skype and
all the other issues that, that
Linux had for a long time. And then
I just stuck with it and then I
dug into iOS, which required
macOS anyhow, so it was never a
question. I think Apple lost
a little bit of its lead
in terms of native. It
used to be... Native
apps used to be so much better,
and especially in the Mac, there's
more people that build software with love.
On, on Windows, it, it...
Windows has much more
and, like, function wise, there's just
more, period. But a lot of it felt
more functional and less done
with love. Um, I mean, Mac
always, like, attracted more
designers and people I felt...
Even though, like, often it has less
features, it, it had more delight-
- Mm-hmm
- ... And playfulness. So I always
valued that. But in the last few
years, many times I actually prefer... Oh
God, people are gonna roast me for that,
but I prefer Electron
apps because they work
and native apps often, especially
if it's, like, a web service
is a native app, are lacking features.
I mean, not saying it couldn't
be done, it's more like a, a focus thing
that, like, for many, many companies,
native was not that big of a priority.
But if they build an Electron
app, it, it's the only app, so it
is a priority and there's a lot
more code sharing possible. And
I, I build a lot of native
Mac apps. I love it. I, I
can, I can help myself. Like, I
love crafting little Mac, Mac,
Menu bar tools. Like I built
one to, to monitor your Codex
use. I built one I call Trimmy,
that's specifically for agentic
use. When you, when you select
text that goes over multiple lines
it would remove the new line so you
could actually paste it to the terminal.
That was, again like, this is annoying me
and after the, the 20th time of
it is annoying me, I just built
it. There is a cool Mac
app for OpenClaw that I
don't think many people discovered yet,
also because it, it still needs some love.
It feels a little bit too much
like the Hummer car right now
because I, I just experiment a lot
with it. It, it likes to polish.
- So you still... I mean, you still
love it. You still, you still love
adding to the delight of
that operating system.
- Yeah, but then you realize... Like,
I also built one, for example, for
GitHub. And then the...
If you use SwiftUI,
like the latest and greatest at
Apple, and took them forever to
build something to show an image from
the web. Now we have async, async image,
but...... I added support for it
and then some images would just
not show up or, like, be very slow.
And I had a discussion with Codex
like, "Hey, why is there a
bug?" And even Codex said like,
"Yeah, there's this ASIC
image but it's really more
for experimenting and it should
not be used in production." But
that's Apple's answer
to, like, showing images
from the web. This shouldn't
be so hard, you know.
This is like... This is
like insane. Like, how am I
in, in, in 2026 and my agent
tell me, "Don't use the
stuff Apple built because it's,
it's... It's... Yeah, it- it's there
but it's not good." And
like this is now in the
weeds. This is... To me this is
like, um... They had so much
head start and so much love,
and they kind of just like
blundered it and didn't, didn't
evolve it as much as they should.
- But also, there's just the
practical reality. If you look at
Silicon Valley, most of
the developer world that's
kind of playing with LMS
and Agentic AI, they're
all using Apple products. And then,
at the same time, Apple is not
really, like, leaning on that.
Like they're not... They're not
opening up and playing and
working together and like, yes.
- Isn't, isn't it funny how
they completely blunder
AI, and yet everybody's buying Mac Minis?
- How... What... Does that even make
sense? You're, you're, you're
quite possibly the world's
greatest Mac salesman of all time.
- No, you don't need a Mac Mini to
install OpenClaw. You can install it
on the web. There's, there's a
concept called nodes, so you can like
make your computer a
node and it will do the
same. There is something said for
running it on separate hardware.
That right now is useful. Um, there
is... There's a big argument for
the browser. You know, I, I built
some Agentic browser use in
there. And, I mean, it's basically
Playwright with a bunch of extras to make it
easier for agents.
- Playwright is a library
that controls the browser.
- Yeah.
- It's really nice, easy to use.
- And our internet is slowly closing
down. Like, there, there's a
whole movement to make it harder
for agents to use. So if you
do the same in a data center and websites
detect that it's an IP from a data
center, the website might just block
you or it make it really hard or
put a lot of captures in the, in the way of the
agent. I mean, agents are quite good at happily
clicking, "I'm not a robot."
- Yeah.
- Um, but having that on a residential
IP makes a lot of things simpler. So
there's ways. Yeah. But it really
does not need to be a Mac. It
can... It can be any old hardware. I
always say, like, maybe use the... Use the
opportunity to get yourself a new
MacBook or whatever computer you
use and use the old one as your server
instead of buying a standalone Mac Mini.
But then there's, again, there's a lot of very
cute things people build with Mac Minis that I
like.
- Yeah.
- Um, and no, I don't get commission from
Apple. They didn't really communicate much.
- It's sad. It's sad.
Can you actually speak to what it takes
to get started with OpenClaw? There's...
I mean, there's a lot of people...
What is it? Somebody tweeted at you,
"Peter, make OpenClaw easy to
set up for everyday people.
99.9% of people can't access to OpenClaw
and have their own lobster because of their
technical difficulties in getting it set up.
Make OpenClaw accessible to everyone,
please." And you replied, "Working on
that." From my perspective, it seems there-
there's a bunch of different options and
it's already quite straightforward,
but I suppose that's if you have some
developer background.
- I mean, right now you have to paste
in one liner into the terminal.
- Right.
- And there's also an app. The app
kind of does that for you, but there
should be a Windows app. The app needs to
be easier and more loved. The
configuration should potentially
be web- based or in the app. And I
started working on that, but honestly right
now I want to focus on security aspects.
And, and once I'm confident that
this is at a level that I can recommend my
mom, then I'm going to make it simpler.
Like I... Right now-
- You want to make it harder so that it
doesn't scale as fast as it's scaling.
- Yeah, it would be nice if it wouldn't...
I mean, that's, like, hard to say, right?
But if the growth would be a little slower,
that would be helpful because people are
expecting inhuman things from a single
human being. And yes, I have some
contributors, but also that whole
machinery I started a week ago so,
That needs more time to
figure out. And, and
not everyone has all day to work on that.
- There's some beginners listening
to this, programming beginners.
What advice would you give to them
about, let's say, joining the Agentic AI
revolution?
- Play. Um, playing is the best...
The best way to learn. If you
wanna... I'm sure if you... If you are
like a little bit of builder, you have
an idea in your head that you want to build,
just build that, or like, give it a try.
It doesn't need to be perfect. I built a whole
bunch of stuff that I don't use. It doesn't
matter. Like, it's the journey.
- Mm-hmm.
- You know? Like the philosophical way,
that the end doesn't matter, the journey
matters. Have fun.
- Mm-hmm.
- My God, like those things... I...
I don't think I ever had so much
fun building things because I
can focus on the hard parts now.
A lot of coding, I always thought I liked
coding, but really I like building.
- Yeah.
- And... And whenever you don't understand
something, just ask. You have
an infinitely patient
answering machine.... that
y- can explain you
anything at any level of
complexity. Sometimes, that's like one
time I asked, "Hey explain to me like
I'm- I'm eight years old," and it
started giving me a story with
crayons and stuff. And I'm like,
"No, not like that." Like, I'm
okay- ... up- up the age a little bit, you know? I'm
like, I'm not an actual child, it's just, I just need
a simpler language for like a- a-
a- a- a tricky database concept
that I didn't grok in the
first- first time. But, you
know, just, you can just
ask things. Like, you-
there's like... It used to be
that I had to go on Stack Overflow or ha-
ask on Twitter, and then maybe two days
later I get a response. Or I had
to try for hours. And now you-
you can just ask stuff. It- I mean,
it's never... You have, like, your own
teacher. You know that there's
like statistics, y- you can learn
faster if you have your own teacher. The- it's
like you have this infinitely patient machine.
Ask it.
- But what would you say? So use... What's
the easiest way to play? So maybe
Open Claw is a nice way to play so
you can then set- set everything up
and then you could chat with it.
- You can also just experiment with
it and, like, modify it. Ask your
agent. I mean, there is infinite
ways how it can be made better.
Play around, make it better.
- Mm-hmm.
- More general, if you- if you're a
beginner and you actually wanna
learn how to build
software really fast, get
involved in open source. Doesn't
need to be my project. In
fact, maybe don't use my project because
my- my backlog is very large,
but I learned so much from
open source. Just like, like, be- be
humble. Don't- maybe don't
send a pull request right
away. But there's many
other ways you can help
out. There's many ways you can just
learn by just reading code. By-
by being on Discord or
wherever people are, and just,
like, understanding how things are built.
I don't know, like Mitchell Hashimoto
builds Ghostly, the terminal,
and he has a really good
community where there's so many other
projects. Like, pick something that you find
interesting and get involved.
- Do you recommend that people
that don't know how to
program or don't really know how to
program learn to program also? So when you
you can get quite far right
now by just using natural
language, right? Do you s-
still see a lot of value in
reading the code, understanding the code, and then
being able to write a little bit of code from
scratch?
- It definitely helps.
- It's hard for you to answer that-
- Yeah
- ... because you don't know what
it's like to do any of this without
knowing the base knowledge. Like, you
might take for granted just how much
intuition you have about the programming
world having programmed so much, right?
- There's people that are high
agency and very curious,
and they get very far even though
they have no deep understanding how
software works just because they ask
questions and questions and- and- and-
... and agents are infinitely
patient. Like, part of what
I did this year is I went to a lot of iOS
conferences because that's my background
and just told people, "Don't consi-
don't see yourself as an iOS
engineer anymore." Like, "You need
to change your mindset. You're a
builder." And you can take a
lot of the knowledge how to
build software into new domains and all
of the- the more fine-grain details,
agents can help. You don't have to
know how to splice an array or what
the- what the correct template
syntax is or whatever, but you can
use all your- your general knowledge
and that makes it much easier
to move from one galaxy, one
tech galaxy into another. And
oftentimes, there's languages that make
more or less sense depending on what you
build, right? So for example, when
I build simple CLIs, I like Go. I
actually don't like Go. I don't like
the syntax of Go. I didn't even
consider the language.
But the ecosystem is
great, it works great with
agents. It is garbage
collected. It's not the highest
performing one, but it's very fast.
And for those type of- of CLIs
that I build, Go is- is a
really good choice. So I- I use
a language I'm not even a fan of
for... That's my main
to-go thing for- for CLIs.
- Isn't that fascinating that here's a programming
language you would've never used if you
had to write it from scratch
and now you're using
because LMs are good at generating it and it
has some of the characteristics that makes
it resilient, like garbage collected?
- Because everything's weird in this new
world and that just makes the most sense.
- What's the best Ridiculous question. What's
the best programming language for the AI- AI
agentic world? Is it
JavaScript, TypeScript?
- TypeScript is really good.
Sometimes the types can get really
confusing and the ecosystem is- is a
jungle. So for- for web stuff it's
good. I wouldn't build everything in it.
- Don't you think we're moving there? Like,
that everything will eventually be written-
eventually is written in JavaScript and it-
- The birth and death of JavaScript and
we are living through it in real time.
- Like, what does programming look like in
20 years? Right? In 30 years? In 40 years?
What do programs and apps look like?
- You can even ask a question like, do we need
a- a programming language that's made for
agents? Because all of those
languages are made for humans.
So how- what would that look like?
Um, I think there's a- there's
whole bunch of interesting questions
that we'll discover. And also how
because everything is now world
knowledge, how it in many ways,
things will stagnate 'cause if you build
something new and the agent has no
idea that's gonna be much harder to
use than something that's already
there. Um...... of when I build Mac apps,
I build them in, in Swift and SwiftUI,
mm, partly because I like pain,
partly because it... the, the deepest
level of system integration, I can
only get through there. And
you clearly feel a difference if you click
on an electron app and it loads a web view
in the menu. It's just not the same. Um,
sometimes I just also try new languages
just to, like, get a feel for them.
- Like Zig?
- Yeah. If it's something that... where
I care about performance a lot then
it's, it's a really interesting
language. And it... like agents got so
much better over the last six
months from not really good to
totally valid choice. Just still a, a very
young ecosystem. And most of the time you
actually care about ecosystem, right?
So, so if you build something that
does inference or goes into whole running
model direction, Python, very good.
- Mm-hmm.
- But then if I build stuff in
Python and I want a story
where I can also deploy it on
Windows, not a good choice.
- Mm-hmm.
- Sometimes I, I found projects that
kinda did 90% of what I wanted
but were in Python, and I wanted
them... I wanted an easy Windows
story. Okay, just rewrite it in
Go. Um, but then if you go towards
multiple, multiple threads and a lot
more performance, Rust is a really
good choice. There's no... there's just no
single answer, and it's also the beauty of it.
Like, it's fun. And now it doesn't matter
anymore, you can just literally pick the
language that has the, the most
fitting characteristics and
ecosystem-
- Mm-hmm
- ... for your problem
domain. And yeah, it might
be... You might have s-... You might be
a little bit slow in reading the code,
but not really. Y- I think
you, you pick stuff up really
fast, and you can always ask your agent.
- So there's a lot of programmers
and builders who draw inspiration
from y- your story. Just the way you carry
yourself, your choice of making OpenClaw
open source, the, the way you have
fun building and exploring, and doing
that, for the most part, alone or on a small
team. So by way of advice, what metric
should be the goal that they would
be optimizing for? What would
be the metric of success? Would it be
happiness? Is it money? Is it
positive impact for people who are
dreaming of building? 'Cause
you went through an interesting
journey. You've achieved a lot of those
things, and then you fell out of love with
programming a little bit for a time.
- I was just burning too
bright for too long.
I, I ran... I started PSPDFKit,
s- and ran it for 13 years,
and it was high stress. Um, I
had to learn all these things
fast and hard, like how to manage people,
how to bring people on, how to deal with
customers, how to do...
- So it wasn't just programming
stuff, it was people stuff.
- The stuff that burned me out was mostly
people stuff. I, I don't think burnout
is working too much.
Maybe to a degree. Everybody's different.
You know, I c- I cannot speak in a- in
absolute terms, but for me,
it was much more differences,
With my, my co-founders, conflicts, or,
like, really high stress situation with
customers that eventually
grinded me down. And then
when... luckily we, we got a really good
offer for, like, putting the company
to the next level and I, I already
kinda worked two years on making myself
obsolete. So at this point I could leave,
and, and then I just... I was sitting
in front of the screen and I felt
like, you know Austin Powers
where they suck the mojo out?
- Yeah.
- Uh, I g- I was like, m- m-
it was, like, gone. Like, I
couldn't... I couldn't get code out
anymore. I was just, like, staring
and feeling empty, and
then I, I just stopped.
I,
I booked, like, a one-way trip to Madrid
and, and, and just, like, spent a t- some t-
sometime there. I felt
like I had to catch up on
life, so I did a whole, a whole
bunch of life catching up stuff.
- Did you go through some lows
during that period? And you
know, maybe advice on... of how to?
- Uh, maybe advice on how to approach life.
If you think that, "Oh yeah, work really
hard and then I'll retire,"
I don't recommend that.
Because the idea of,
"Oh yeah, I just enjoy
life now," a- maybe it's appealing, but
right now I enjoy life, the most I've
ever enjoyed life. Because if you wake up
in the morning and you have nothing to look
forward to, you have no real challenge,
that gets very boring, very fast. And
then when, when you're
bored, you're gonna look
for other places how to stimulate
yourself, and then maybe, maybe that's
drugs, you know? But that eventually also
get boring and you look for more, and that
will lead you down a very dark path.
- But you also showed on the money front, you know,
a lot of people in Silicon Valley and the startup
world, they think, maybe
overthink way too much optimized
for money. And you've also shown that
it's not like you're saying no to
money. I mean, I'm sure you take money,
but it's not...... the primary objective
of uh, of your life. Can you just speak
to that? Your philosophy on money?
- When I built my company, money was
never the driving force. It felt
more like, like, an affirmation
that I did something right.
And having money solves
a lot of problems. I
also think there, there's diminishing
returns the more you have. Um,
like, a cheeseburger is a cheeseburger,
and I think if you go too far
into, oh, I do private jet
and I only travel luxury, you
disconnect with society.
Um, I, I donated quite a
lot. Like, I have a, I
have a foundation for
helping people that weren't so lucky.
- And disconnecting from society is
bad in that on many levels, but
one of them is, like, humans are awesome.
It's nice to continuously remember
the awesomeness in humans.
- I, I mean, I could afford really nice hotels.
The last time I was in San Francisco, I did the,
the first time the OG Airbnb experience-
- Yeah, yeah
- ... and just booked a room.
Mostly because I, I thought,
okay, you know, I'm out
or I'm sleeping, and
I don't like where all the hotels are,
and I wanted a, I wanted a different
experience. I think, isn't life all
about experiences? Like, if you, if
you tailor your life
towards, "I wanna have
experiences," it, it reduces
the need for, "It needs
to be good or bad." Like,
if people only want good
experiences, that's not gonna work,
but if you optimize for experiences,
if it's good, amazing. If it's
bad, amazing, because, like,
I learned something, I saw something, did
something. I wanted to experience that, and it was
amazing. Like, there was,
like, this, this queer DJ in
there, and I showed her how to
make music with cloud code.
And we, like, immediately
bonded and had a great time.
- Yeah, there's something about that air- you
know, couch surfing, Airbnb experience, the
OG. I'm still to this
day. It's awesome. It's
humans, and that's why travel is awesome.
- Yeah.
- Just experience the variety of, the diversity
of human. And when it's shitty, it's good too,
man. If it rains and you're soaked
and it's all fucked, and planes, the
everything is shit, everything is
fucked, it's still awesome. If you're
able to open your eyes
it's good to be alive.
- Yeah, and anything that creates
emotion and feelings is good.
- .
- Even... So, so maybe, maybe even the cryptic
people are good because they definitely
created emotions. I, I don't
know if I should go that far.
- No, man. Give them, give them all, give
them love. Give them love. Because I do
think that online lacks some of
the awesomeness of real life.
- Yeah.
- That's, that's, it's an open problem of how
to solve, how to infuse the online cyber
experience with I don't know,
With the intensity that we humans
feel when it's in real life. I
don't know. I don't know if
that's a solvable problem.
- Well, it's just possible
because text is very lossy.
- Yeah.
- You know, sometimes I wish if I
talked to the agent I would...
It should be multi-model so it
also understands my emotions.
- I mean, it, it might move
there. It might move there.
- It will. It will. It totally will.
- I mean, I have to ask you, just
curious. I, I know you've probably
gotten huge offers from major
companies. Can you speak to who you're
considering working with?
- Yeah. So, to like explain my
thinking a little bit, right,
I did not expect this blowing up so much.
So, there's a lot of doors that
opened because of it. There's, like,
I think every VC, every big VC company is
in my inbox and tried to get 15 minutes of
me. So, there's, like, this
butterfly effect moment. I could
just do nothing and continue
and I really like my life. Valid choice.
Almost. Like, I considered it when I
delete it, wanted to delete the whole
thing. I could create a company.
Been there, done that. Um,
there's so many people that push me towards
that and, yeah, like, could be amazing.
- Which is to say that you, you would
probably raise a lot of money in that.
- Yeah.
- I don't know, hundreds of millions, billions. I
don't know. It could just got unlimited amount of
money.
- Yeah. It just doesn't excite
me as much because I feel
I did all of that, and it would
take a lot of time away from the things I
actually enjoy. Same as when, when I was
CEO, I think I, I learned to do it and I'm
not bad at it, and partly I'm good at it.
But yeah, that path doesn't excite
me too much, and I also fear it, it
would create a natural conflict of
interest. Like, what's the most
obvious thing I do? I, I
prioritize it. I put, like,
a version safe for workplace. And then
what do you do? Like, I get a pull request
with a feature like an audit log, but
that seems like an enterprise feature,
so now I feel I have a
conflict of interest in
the open-source version
and the closed- source
version.... or change the
license to something like
FSL, where you cannot actually use
it for commercial stuff, would first
be very difficult with all the
contributions. And second of all,
I- I like the idea that it's free as in
beer and not free with conditions. Um,
yeah, there's ways how you, how you keep
all of that for free and just, like,
still try to make money, but
those are very difficult. And
you see there's, like, fewer and fewer
companies manage that. Like, even
Tailwind, they're, like, used by everyone.
Everyone uses Tailwind, right? And
then they had to cut off 75% of the employees
because they're not making money because
nobody's even going on the website
anymore because it's all done by agents.
S- and just relying on donations, yeah,
good luck. Like, if a project of my
caliber, if I extrapolate what the
typical open-source project would get
it's not a lot. I s- I still lose
money on the project because I
made the point of supporting
every dependency,
except Slack. They are a big company. They
can, they can, they can do without me.
But all the projects
that are done by mostly
individuals so, like, all
the, right now, all the
sponsorship goes right up to my dependencies.
And if there's more, I want to, like,
buy my contributors some merch, you know?
- So you're losing money?
- Yeah, right now I lose money on this.
- So it's really not sustainable?
- Uh, I mean, it's like, I guess something
between 10 and 20K a month. Um,
which is fine. I'm sure over time I could
get that down. Um, OpenAI is helping out a
little bit with tokens now. And
there's other companies that
have been generous. But yeah,
still losing money on that.
So that's- that's one path I consider, but
I'm just not very excited. And
then there's all the big labs
that I've been talking to.
And from those Meta and OpenAI
seem the most interesting.
- Do you lean one way or the other?
- Uh, yeah. Um...
Not sure how much I should share there.
It's not quite finalized yet. Um,
let's- let's just say,
like, on either of these,
my conditions are that the
project stays open source. That
it... Maybe it's gonna be a model like
Chrome and Chromium. Um, I think this
is- this is too important to just
give to a company and make it theirs.
It... This is... And we didn't even
talk about the whole community
part, but, like, the- the thing that
I experienced in San Francisco, like
at ClawCon, seeing so many people
so inspired, like... And
having fun and just, like,
building shit, and, like, having,
like, robots in lobster stuff walking
around. Like, the... People
told me, like, they didn't
experience this level of- of community
excitement since, like, the early days of the
internet, like 10, 15 years. And there were a
lot of high caliber
people there, like... Um,
I was amazed. I also, like, was very
sensory overloaded because too many people
wanted to do selfies. But I love this. Like,
this needs to stay a place where people
can, like, hack and learn. But
also, I'm very excited to, like,
make this into a version that
I can get to a lot of people
because I think this is the year
of personal agents, and that's the
future. And the fastest way to do that
is teaming up with one of the labs.
And I also, on a personal level,
I never worked at a large
company, and I'm
intrigued. You know, we talk about
experiences. Will I like it? I don't
know. But I want that experience.
Uh, I- I'm sure, like, if- if
I- if I announce this, then there will be
people like, "Oh, he sold out," blah, blah,
blah. But
the project will continue. From everything
I talked to so far, I can even have
more resources for that.
Like, both s- both of those
companies understand the value
that I created something that
accelerates our timeline and that
got people excited about AI. I mean,
can you imagine? Like,
I installed OpenClaw
on one of my, I'm sorry, normie
friends. I'm sorry, Vahan.
But he's just a... You know? Like, he's-
- Normie with love, yeah. For sure.
- He- he, like, someone who
uses the computer, but
never really... Like, yeah, use some
ChatGPT sometimes, but not very technical.
Wouldn't really understand
what I built. So, like,
I'll show you, and I- I paid
for him the- the 90 buck,
100 buck, I don't know,
subscription for Entropic.
And set up everything for
him with, like, WSL Windows.
- Mm-hmm.
- I was also curious, would it actually
work on Windows, you know? Was a little
early. And then within a few days,
he was hooked. Like, he texted me
about all the things he learned. He built,
like, even little tools. He's not a
programmer. And then within a
few days he upgraded to the
$200 subscription. Or
euros, because he's in
Austria.... and he was in
love with that thing. That,
for me, was like a very early product
validation. It's like, I built something
that captures people.
And then, a few days later,
Entropic blocked him because,
based on their rules using the
subscription is problematic or whatever.
And he was, like, devastated. And
then he signed up for Mini Max for 10
bucks a month and uses that. And I think
that's silly in many ways, because
you just got a 200 buck customer. You just
made someone hate your
company, and we are still so
early. Like, we don't even know
what the final form is. Is it
gonna be cloud code? Probably
not, you know? Like, that
seems very... It seems
very short-sighted to
lock down your product
so much. All the other
companies have been helpful.
I- I'm in Slack of, of most
of the big labs. Kind of everybody
understands that we are still in an
era of exploration, in the area
of the radio shows on TV and not,
and not a modern TV show
that fully uses the format.
- I think, I think you've
made a lot of people,
like, see the possibility. And non- Uh,
sorry. Non, non-technical people see the
possibility of AI, and just fall
in love with this idea, and
enjoy interacting with AI. And that's a bea-
That's a really beautiful thing. I think
I also speak for a lot
of people in saying,
I think you're one of the, the great
people in AI in terms of having a good
heart, good vibes, humor,
the right spirit. And so
it would, in a sense, this
model that you're describing,
having open source part, and you
being part of uh, also building a
thing inside, additionally,
of a large company
would be great, because it's great to
have good people in those companies.
- Yeah. You know, what also people
don't really see is... I made this in
three months. I did other things as well.
You know, I have a lot of projects. Like,
this is not... Yeah, in January, this was
my main focus because I saw the storm
coming. But before that, I built
a whole bunch of other things.
Um, I have so many ideas. Some
should be there, some would
be much better fitted
when I have access to
the latest toys- Uh, and I, I kind of want
to have access to, like, the latest toys.
So this is important, this is
cool, this will continue to
exist. My, my short-term focus is, like,
working through those... Is it two- Is it
3,000 PRs now by now? I don't even know.
Like, there's, there's a little bit of
backlog. But this is not gonna
be the thing that I'm gonna work until
I'm, I'm, I'm 80, you know? This
is... This is a window into the future.
I'm gonna make this into a cool
product. But yeah, I have
like... I have more ideas.
- If you had to pick, is there
a company you lean? So Meta, OpenAI,
is there one you lean towards going?
- I spend time with both of those. And
it's funny, because a few weeks ago,
I didn't consider any of this. Um...
And it's really fucking hard. Like-
- Yeah.
- I have some... I know
no people at OpenAI. I
love their tech. I think
I'm the biggest codex
advertisement shill that's unpaid.
And it would feel so gratifying to,
like, put a price on all the
work I did for free. And
I would love if something happens and those
companies get just merged, because it's
like...
- Is this the hardest decision
you've ever had to do?
- No. You know, I had some breakups in the
past that feel like it's the same level.
- Relationships, you mean?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Um, and, and I also know that, in the
end, they're both amazing. I cannot go
wrong. This is like-
- Right.
- This is, like, one of the most
prestigious and, and, and, and, and
largest... I mean, not largest, but,
like, they're both very cool companies.
- Yeah, they both really
know scale. So, if you're
thinking about impact, some of the
wonderful technologies you've been
exploring, how to do it
securely, and how to do it at
scale, such that you can have a positive
impact on a large number of people. They
both understand that.
- You know, both Ned and Mark basically played
all week with my product, and sent me
like, "Oh, this is great." Or, "This
is shit. Oh, I need to change this."
Or, like, funny little anecdotes. And
people using your stuff is kind of like the
biggest compliment, and also shows me that, you
know, they actually... T-
they actually care about it.
And I didn't get the same
on the OpenAI side. Um,
I got... I got to see some other
stuff that I find really cool,
and they lure me with... I cannot tell
you the exact number because of NDA, but
you can, you can be creative and, and think
of the Cerebras deal and how that would
translate into speed. And it was
very intriguing. You know, like,
you give me Thor's hammer. Yeah.
... been lured with tokens. So,
yeah.
- So, it- it's funny. So, so Marc
started tinkering with the thing,
essentially having fun with the thing.
- He got... He... Like, when he
first... When he first approached me,
I got him in my, in my WhatsApp and he
was asking, "Hey, when are we have a
call?" And I'm like, "I don't like
calendar entries. Let's just call
now." And he was like, "Yeah, give me
10 minutes, I need to finish coding."
- Mm-hmm.
- Well, I guess that gives you street cred.
It's like, ugh, like, he's still writing
code. You know, he's-
- Yeah, he does
- ... he didn't drift away in just
being a manager, he gets me.
That was a good first start. And
then I think we had a, like, a
10-minute fight what's better, cloud code
or Codex. Like, that's the thing you
first do, like, you casually call-
- Yeah, that's awesome
- ... someone with, like, the- that owns one
of the largest companies in the world and,
and you have a 10 minutes
conversation about that.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Uh, and then I think afterwards he
called me eccentric but brilliant. But
I also had some... I had some really,
really cool discussion with Sam Altman and
he's, he's very thoughtful
brilliant and
I like him a lot
from the, from the little time I
had, yeah. I mean, I know it's peop-
some people vilify both of those
people. I don't think it's fair.
- I think no matter what the stuff you're
building and the kind of human you are
doing stuff at scale is
kinda awesome. I'm excited.
- I am super pumped. And you
know the beauty is if,
if it doesn't work out, I can just
do my own thing again.
Like, I, I told them, like,
I, I don't do this for the
money, I don't give a fuck. I-
- Yeah.
- I mean, of course, of course it's
a nice compliment but I wanna have
fun and have impact, and
that's ultimately what
made my decision.
- Can I ask you about... we've talked
about it quite a bit, but maybe
just zooming out about how OpenCloud
works. We talked about different
components, I want to ask if there's
some interesting stuff we missed.
So, there's the gateway,
there's the chat clients,
there's the harness there's
the agentic loop. You
said somewhere that everybody
should im- implement an agent loop
at some point in their lives.
- Yeah, because it's like the, it's like
the Hello World in AI, you know? And
it's actually quite simple.
- Yeah.
- And it- it's good to understand that
that stuff's not magic. You can, you
can easily build it yourself. So,
writing your own little cloud
code... I, I even did this at a
conference in Paris for people to, like,
introduce them to AI. I think it's it's a
fun little practice. Um, and
you, you covered a lot. I think
one, one silly idea I had that
turned out to be quite cool is
I built this thing
with full system access. So it's like,
you know, with great power comes great
responsibility. And I was like, "How
can I up the stakes a little bit more?"
- Yeah, right.
- And I just made a... I made
it proactive. So, I added
a prompt. Initially, it was
just a prompt, surprise me.
Every, like, half an hour,
surprise me, you know? And
later on I changed it to be like
a little more specific and-
... in the definition of surprise. Um,
but the fact that I made
it proactive and that it
knows you and that it cares about
you, it- it's at least it's
programmed to that, prompted
to do that. And that, that is
a follow on, on your current session makes it very interesting because it
would just sometimes ask a follow-up question or like, "How's your day?"
And I just made a... I made it proactive. So, I added a prompt. Initially, it was
just a prompt, surprise me. Every, like, half an hour, surprise me, you know?
And later on I changed it to be
like a little more specific and-
And that, that is a follow on, on your current session makes it very interesting because
it would just sometimes ask a follow-up question or like, "How's your day?" I mean,
again, it's a little creepy
or weird or interesting but
Heartbeat very... in the
beginning, it's still... today, it
doesn't... the model doesn't
choose to use it a lot.
- By the way, we're, we're, we're talking about
Heartbeat, as you mentioned, the thing that
regularly-
- Yeah. Like kicks-
- ... Acts.
- You just kick off the loop.
- Isn't that just a cron job, man?
- Yeah, right, I mean, it's like-
- It's the cr- the criticisms
that you get are hilarious.
- You can, you can deduce any idea to like a
silly... Yeah, it's just,
it's just a cron job in
the end. I have like
cron- separate cron jobs.
- Isn't love just evolutionary biology
manifesting itself and isn't... aren't
you guys just using each other?
- And then, yeah, and the project is all
just glue of a few different dependencies-
... and there's nothing original.
Why do people... Well, you know,
isn't Dropbox just FTP with extra steps?
- Yeah.
- I found it surprising
where I had this I had a
shoulder operation a few months ago, so.
- Mm-hmm.
- And the model rarely used
Heartbeat, but then I was in the
hospital, and it knew that I had
the operation and it checked up on
me. It's like, "Are you okay?" And I
just... It's like, again, apparently,
like, if something's significant in the
context, that triggered the Heartbeat
when it rarely used the Heartbeat.... um,
and it does that sometimes for people, and
that just makes it a lot more relatable.
- Uh, let me look this up on
Perplexity, how OpenCall
works just to see if I'm
missing any of the stuff.
Local agent run time, high-level architecture.
There's... Oh, we haven't talked much
about skills, I suppose. Skill
hub, the tools in the skill lair,
but that's definitely a huge component
and there's a huge growing set of skills-
- You know, you know what I love? That
half a year ago, like everyone
was talking about MCPs-
- Yeah
- ... and I was like, "Screw MCPs.
Uh, every MCP would be better as a
CLI." And now this stuff doesn't even
have MCP support. I mean, it, it has with
asterisks, but not in the core
lair, and nobody's complaining.
- Mm-hmm.
- So my approach is if you want to extend
the model with more features, you
just build a CLI and the
model can call the CLI,
probably gets it wrong, calls the
help menu, and then on demand loads
into the context what it needs
to use the CLI. It just needs a
sentence to know that
the CLI exists if it's
something that the model doesn't know
about default. And even for a while,
I, I didn't really care about skills,
but skills are actually perfect for
that because they, they boil
down to a single sentence
that explains the skill and then the model
loads the skill, and that explains the
CLI, and then the model uses the
CLI. Some skills are, like raw, but
most of the time, networks.
- It's interesting um, I'm asking
Perplexity MCP versus skills,
because this kind of requires
a hot take that's quite
recent, because your general view is MCPs
are dead-ish. So MCPs is a more structured
thing. So if you listen to Perplexity
here, MCP is what can I reach? So APIs,
database services files via protocol.
So a structured protocol of
how you communicate with a
thing, and then skills is more
how should I work? Procedures,
hostile helper scripts and prompts
are often written in a kind of
semi- structured natural language,
right? And so technically skills could
replace MCP if you have a smart enough model.
- I think the main beauty is, is
that models are really good at
calling Unix commands. So
if you just add another
CLI, that's just another
Unix command in the end. And
MCP is... That has to be
added in training. That's
not a very natural thing for the
model. It requires a very specific
syntax. And the biggest thing, it's not
composable. So imagine if I have a
service that gives me better data
and gives me the temperature,
the average temperature, rain,
wind and all the other stuff,
and I get like this huge blob
back. As a model, I always have to get the
huge blob back. I have to fill my
context with that huge blob and then
pick what I want. There's no way
for the model to naturally filter
unless I think about it proactively
and add a filtering way into my
MCP. But if I would build
the same as a CLI and
it would give me this huge blob, it could
just add a JQ command and filter itself
and then only, only get me what
I actually need. Or maybe even
compose it into a script to, like do some
calculations with the temperature and
only give me the exact output and the mo-
and the... you have no context pollution.
Again, you can solve that with like
sub- agents and more charades,
but it's just like workarounds
for something that
might not be the optimal way.
There's... It definitely it
was, you know, it was good that
we had MCPs because it pushed a lot
of companies towards building APIs
and now I, I can like look at an
MCP and just make it into a CLI.
- Mm-hmm.
- Um, but this, this inherent problem
that MCPs by default clutter up your
context. Plus the fact that
most MCPs are not made good, in
general make it just not a very useful
paradigm. There's some exceptions like
Playwright for example that
requires state and it's actually
useful. That is an acceptable choice.
- So Playwright you use for browser
use, which I think is c- already in
OpenClaw is quite incredible, right?
- Yeah.
- You can basically do everything, most
things you can think of using browser use.
- That, that gets into
the whole arch of every
app is just a very slow API now,
if they want or not. And that
through personal agents a lot of
apps will disappear. You
know, like I had a... I built
a CLI for Twitter. I mean, I- I just
reverse engineered their website
and used the internal API, which
is not very allowed.
- It's called Bird, short-lived.
- It was called Bird, because
the bird had to disappear.
- The, the wings were clipped.
- All they did is they just
made access slower. Yeah,
not tak- you're not actually
taking a feature away,
but now inst- if, if your agent wants to read a
tweet, it actually has to open the browser and
read the tweet. And it will still be able to
read the tweet. It will just take longer.
It's not like you are
making something that was
possible, not possible. No. Now,
it's just taking... Now it's just a
bit slower. So, so it
doesn't really matter if
your service wants to be
an API or not. If I can
access it in the browser......
easy API. It's a slow API.
- Can you empathize with their situation? Like, what
would you do if you were Twitter, if you were
X? Because they're basically trying
to protect against other large
companies scraping all their data.
- Yeah.
- But in so doing, they're cutting off
like a million different use cases for
smaller developers that actually want
to use it for helpful cool stuff.
- I think that if you have a
very low per day baseline
per account that allows read-only access
would solve a lot of problems. There's
plenty, plenty of automations where people
create a bookmark and then
use OpenClaw to, like,
find the bookmark, do research on
it, and then send you an email-
- Mm-hmm
- ... with, like, more details on it or
a summary. That's a cool approach.
I also want all my bookmarks somewhere to
search. I would still like to have that.
- So, read-only access for the bookmarks
you make on X. That seems like an
incredible application because a lot of us
find a lot of cool stuff on X, we bookmark,
that's the general purpose of X. It's
like, holy shit, this is awesome.
Oftentimes, you bookmark so many
things you never look back at them.
- Yeah.
- It would be nice to have tooling that organizes
them and allows you to research it further.
- Yeah, I mean, and to be frank, I, I mean,
I, I told Twitter proactively
that, "Hey, I built
this and there's a need." And they've
been really nice, but also like,
"Take it down." Fair. Totally
fair. But I hope that
this woke up the team a little bit
that there's a need. And if all you do
is making it slower, you're just reducing
access to your platform. I'm sure there's
a better way. I also, I'm very much
against any automation on
Twitter. If you tweet at
me with AI, I will block
you. No first strike. As
soon as it smells like AI,
and AI still has a smell.
- Mm-hmm.
- Especially on tweets. It's very hard
to tweet in a way that does
look completely human.
- Mm-hmm.
- And then I block. Like, I have a
zero tolerance policy on that. And
I think it would be very helpful if they,
if, like, tweets done
via API would be marked.
Maybe there's some special cases
where... But, and there should
be, there should be a very easy
way for agents to get their own
Twitter account. Um...
- Mm-hmm.
- We, we need to rethink social platforms
a little bit if, if, if we, we, we go
towards a future where everyone has their
agent and agents maybe have their own
Instagram profiles
or Twitter accounts, so I can, like, do
stuff on my behalf. I think it should
very clearly be marked that they are
doing stuff on my behalf and it's not
me. Because content is now so cheap.
Eyeballs are the expensive part. And
I find it very triggering when I read something
and then I'm like, oh, no, this smells
like AI.
- Yeah. Like, where, where is this headed
in terms of what we value about the human
experience? It feels like we'll, we'll move
more and more towards in-person interaction
and we'll just communicate.
We'll talk to our AI agent
to, to accomplish different
tasks, to learn about different
things, but we won't value online
interaction because there'll be so much
AI slob that smells and so many bots
that it's difficult.
- Well, if it's smart, then it shouldn't
be difficult to filter. And then
I can look at it if I want to. But
yeah, this is, like, a big thing
we need to solve right now. E-
especially on this project,
I get so many emails that
are, let's say nicely,
agentically written.
- Yeah.
- But I much rather read your
broken English than your AI
slob. You know, of course there's a human
behind it, and yet they, they prompt
it. I'd much rather read your
prompt than what came out. Um,
I think we're reaching a point
where I value typos again.
Like, um...
Like,
and I, I mean, it also took me a while to,
like, come to the realization. I, on my
blog I experimented with creating
a blog post with agents and
ultimately it took me about the
same time to, like, steer agent
towards something I like. But it missed
the nuances that, how I would write
it. You know, you can like, you
can steer it towards your style,
but it's not gonna be all your
style. So, I, I completely
moved away from that. I, I, everything,
everything I blog is organic, handwritten
and maybe, maybe I, I, I use AI
as a fix my worse typos. But
there's value in the rough
parts of an actual human.
- Isn't that awesome? Isn't that
beautiful? That now because of AI
we value the raw humanity
in each of us more.
- I also, I also realized this thing that
I, I rave about AI and use it so much for
anything that's code, but I'm
allergic if it's stories.
- Right. Yeah.
- Also, documentation, still fine with
AI. You know, better than nothing.
- And for now it's still i- it applies
in the mi- in the visual medium
too. It's fascinating how allergic I am to
even a little bit of AI slob in in video
and images. It's useful, it's nice if
it's like a little component of like-
- Or even, even those images. The, like,
all these infographics and stuff,
the-... they trigger me so hard.
- Yeah.
- Like, it immediately makes me think less
of your content. And it ... They were
novel for, like, one week and
now it just screams slop.
- Yeah.
- Even- even if people
work hard on it, using
... And I- I have some on my blog post,
you know, in the- in the time where I- I
explored this new medium. But now, they
trigger me as well. It's like, yeah, this
is ... This just screams AI slop. I-
- What... I don't know what that is, but I went through
that too. I was really excited by the diagrams.
And then I realized, in order to remove from
them hallucinations, you actually have to
do a huge amount of work.
And you're just using it to
draw the better diagrams, great. And then
I'm proud of the diagram. I've used them for
literally, like, ki- ki- kind of like you said
for maybe a couple of weeks. And now I look at
those, and I- I feel like I feel
when I look at Comic Sans as a
font or- or something like
this. It's like, "No, this is-"
- It's a smell.
- "... this is fake. It's fraudulent. There's
something wrong with it." And it...
- It's a smell.
- And it's awesome because it re-
it reminds you that we know.
There's so much to humans that's amazing
and we know that. And we- we know
it. We know it when we see it. And so
that gives me a lot of hope,
you know? That gives me a lot of hope about the
human experience. It's not going to be damaged
by ... It's only going to be
empowered as tools by AI. It's
not going to be damaged or limited or
somehow altered to where it's no longer
human. So ... Uh, I need a bathroom
break. Quick pause. You mentioned
that a lot of the apps might be
basically made obsolete.
Do you think agents will just
transform the entire app market?
- Yeah. Uh, I noticed that on
Discord, that people just said
how their ... like, what they build
and what they use it for. And it's
like, why do you need MyFitnessPal when
the agent already knows where I am?
So, it can assume that I make
bad decisions when I'm at,
I don't know, Waffle House, what's
around here? Or- or briskets in Austin.
- There's no bad decisions
around briskets, but yeah.
- No, that's the best
decision, honestly. Um-
- Your agent should know that.
- But it can, like ... It can
modify my- my gym workout based
on how well I slept, or if
I'm ... if I have stress or
not. Like, it has so much more
context to make even better
decisions than any of
this app even could do.
- Mm-hmm.
- It could show me UI just as I
like. Why do I still need an
app to do that? Why do I have to ... Why
should I pay another subscription for
something that the agent
can just do now? And
why do I need my- my Eight
Sleep app to control
my bed when I can tell the a- ... tell the
agent to ... You know, the agent already
knows where I am, so he can,
like, turn off what I don't use.
- Mm-hmm.
- And I think that will ... that
will translate into a whole
category of apps that are no longer
... I will just naturally stop using
because my agent can just do it better.
- I think you said somewhere that
it might kill off 80% of apps.
- Yeah.
- Don't you think that's a gigantic
transformative effect on
just all software development? So that
means it might kill off a lot of software
companies.
- Yeah. Um-
- It's a scary thing. So,
like, do you think about
the impact that has on the economy? On,
Just the ripple effects it has to society?
Transforming who builds what
tooling. It empowers a lot of
users to get stuff done, to get stuff
more efficiently, to get it done cheaper.
- It's also new services that
we will need, right? For
example, I want my agent to
have an allowance. Like,
you solve problems for me, here's
like 100 bucks in order to solve
problems for me. And if
I tell you to order me
food, maybe it uses a service.
Maybe it uses something
like rent-a-human to, like,
just get that done for me.
- Mm-hmm.
- I don't actually care. I care about
solve my problem. There's space for-
for new companies to solve that
well. Maybe don't ... Not all apps
disappear. Maybe some
transform into being API.
- So, basically, apps that rapidly
transform in being agent-facing.
So, there's a real opportunity
for, like, Uber Eats,
that we just used earlier today. It- it's
companies this, of which there's many.
Who gets there fastest to being able to
interact with OpenClaw in a way that's
the m- the most natural, the easiest?
- Yeah. And also, apps will become
API if they want or not. Because
my agent can figure out how to use my
phone. I mean, on- on the other side,
it's a little more tricky.
On Android, that's already
... People already do that. And then
we'll just click the Order Uber
for Me button for me. Um,
or maybe another service. Or maybe there's-
there's a ... there's an API I can call so it's
faster. Uh, I think
that's a space we're just
beginning to even understand
what that means. And I
... Again, I didn't even ... That was not
something I thought of. Something that I-
that I discovered as people use
this, and it ... We are still so
early. But yeah, I think
data is very important.
Like, apps that can give me
data, but that also can be
API. Why do I need a Sonos app anymore
when I can ... when my agent can
talk to the Sonos?... Speakers directly.
Like my cameras, there's like a crappy app,
but they have, they have an API,
so my agent uses the API now.
- So it's gonna force a lot of companies
to have to shift focus. That's kind
of what the internet did,
right? You have to rapidly
rethink, reconfigure what you're
selling, how you're making money.
- Yeah, and some companies were really
not like that. For example, there's no
CLI for Google, so I had to like,
do... have to do anything myself and
build GAWK. That's like a CLI for
Google. And at the... Yeah, at the end
user, they have to give me the
emails because otherwise I
cannot use their product.
If I'm a company and I try
to get Google data, Gmail, there's a
whole complicated process,
to the point where sometimes
startups acquire startups that
went through the process, so they
don't- don't have to work with Google
for half a year to be certified
to being able to access
Gmail. But my agent
can access Gmail because
I can just connect to it.
It's still crappy because I need
to, like, go through Google's
developer jungle to get a key,
and that's still annoying.
But they cannot prevent
me. And worst case, my
agent just clicks on the, on the
website and gets the data out that way.
- Through browsers?
- Yeah. I mean, I, I watch my agent happily
click the I'm not a robot button.
And there's this, this
whole... That's gonna
be... That's gonna be more heated. You
see companies like Cloudflare that
try to prevent bot access. And
in some ways, that's useful for
scraping. But in other ways, if I'm, I'm a
personal user, I want
that. You know, sometimes
I, I use Codex and I, I
read an article about
modern React patterns,
and it's like a Medium article. I
paste it in and the agent can't read
it because they block it. So then I have
to copy-paste the actual text. Or in
the future, I'll learn that maybe I don't click
on Medium because it's annoying, and I use
other websites that actually
are agent friendly. So, uh-
- There's gonna be a lot of powerful,
rich companies fighting back.
So it's really intere- You're at the
center, you're the catalyst, the leader,
and happen to be at the center of this kind of
revolution where it's get- gonna completely
change how we interact
with services with, with
web. And so, like, there's companies at
Google that are gonna push back. I mean, there's every
major companies you could think of is gonna push
back.
- Even... Yeah, even search. Um, I now
use, I think Perplexity or Brave
as providers because Google really
doesn't make it easy to use Google
without Google. I'm not sure if that's
the right strategy, but I'm not
Google.
- Yeah, there's a, there's a nice balance from
a big company perspective 'cause if you
push back too much for too long, you become
Blockbuster and you lose everything to the
Netflixes of the world. But some
pushback is probably good during a
revolution to see.
- Yeah. But you see that, that... Like,
this is something that the people want.
- Right.
- So-
- Yes.
- If I'm on the go,
I don't wanna open a calendar app.
I just... I wanna tell my agent,
"Hey, remind me about this dinner
tomorrow night," and maybe invite
two of my friends and then maybe send
a what- send a WhatsApp message to my
friend. And I don't need... I don't want or
need to open apps for that. I think that
we passed that age, and
now everything is, like,
much more connected and, and fluid
if those companies want it or
not. And I think, well, the
right companies will find
ways to jump on the train, and
other companies will perish.
- You got to listen to what the people
want. We talked about programming quite a
bit, and a lot of folks
that are developers are really
worried about their jobs, about
their... About the future of
programming. Do you think AI replaces
programmers completely? Human programmers?
- I mean, we're definitely going in
that direction. Programming is just
a part of building products. So maybe,
maybe AI does replace programmers
eventually. But there's so
much more to that art. Like,
what do you actually wanna build?
How should it feel? How's the
architecture? I don't think
agents will replace all of that.
Yeah, like, just the, the
actual art of programming,
it will, it will stay there,
but it's, it's gonna be like
knitting. You know? Like, people do that
because they like it, not because it makes
any sense. So the... I read
this article this morning
about someone that it's okay
to mourn our craft. And I
can... A part of me very strongly
resonates with that because
in my past I, I spent a lot of time
tinkering, just being really
deep in the flow and just, like,
cranking out code and, like, finding
really beautiful solutions. And
yes, in a way it's, it's sad
because that will go away.
And I also get a lot of joy out of just
writing code and being really deep
in my thoughts and forgetting
time and space and just
being in this beautiful state of flow.
But you can get the same state of
flow... I get a similar state of
flow by working with agents and
building and thinking really hard
about problems. It is different-...
but... And it's okay to mourn it, but,
uh, I mean, that's not something
we can fight. Like, there
is... the world for a long
time had a... there was a
lack of intelligence, if
you s- if you see it like
that, of people building
things, and that's
why salaries of software developers
reached stupidly high amounts
and then will go away. There
will still be a lot of demand
for people that understand how to
build things. It's just that all this
tokenized intelligence enables
people to do a lot more, a lot
faster. And it will be even more...
even faster and even more because
those things are continuously improving.
We had similar things when... I
mean, it's probably not a perfect
analogy, but when we created
the steam engine, and they
built all these factories
and replaced a lot of manual
labor, and then people revolted
and broke the machines. Um,
I- I can relate that if you very deeply
identify that you are a programmer,
that it's scary and that
it's threatening because
what you like and what you're
really good at is now being done by
a soulless or not entity. But I
don't think you're just a
programmer. That's a very limiting
view of your craft. You are,
you are still a builder.
- Yeah, there's a couple of things I want
to say. So one is, I never... As you're
articulating this beautifully, I no- I'm
realizing I never thought I would...
the thing I love doing
would be the thing that gets replaced. You
hear these stories about these, like you
said, with the steam
engine. I've, I've spent so
many, I don't know,
maybe thousands of hours
poring over code and putting
my heart and soul and,
like, and just, like, some of
my most painful and happiest
moments were alone behind... I, I was an
Emacs person for a long time. Man, Emacs.
And, and then there's an identity
and there's meaning, and
there's... Like, when I walk about the
world, I don't say it out loud, but
I think of myself as a programmer.
And to have that in a matter
of months... I mean, like
you mentioned, April to
November, it really is a leap that
happened, a shift that's happening.
To have that completely replaced
is is painful. It's, it's truly
painful. But I also think
programmers, builders more broadly,
but what is, what is the act
of programming? I, I think
programmers are generally best
equipped at this moment in history
to learn the language, to empathize with
agents, to learn the language of agents. To
feel the CLI.
- Yeah.
- Like, like to understand what is the
thing you need, you the agent, need to
do this task the best?
- I think at some point it's just gonna be called
coding again, and it's just gonna be the new
normal.
- Yeah.
- And yet, while I don't write
the code, I very much feel like
I'm in the driver's seat and I am, I am
writing the code, you know? It's just-
- You'll still be a programmer. It's
just the activity of a programmer is,
is different.
- Yeah, and because on X, the bubble, I mean,
is mostly positive. On, on Mastodon and
Bluesky, I don't... I
also use it less because
oftentimes I got attacked
for my blog posts. And
I, I had stronger reactions in the past,
now I can sympathize with those people more
'cause, in a way I get it. It... In
a way, I also don't get it because
it's very unfair to
grab onto the person that you see right
now and unload all your fear and hate.
It's gonna be a change and it's
gonna be challenging, but it's
also... I don't know. I find it incredibly
fun and, and, and gratifying. And
I can, I can use the new time to
focus on much more details. I think
the level of expectation of what we
build is also rising because it's
just now... The default is now
so much easier, so software is changing
in many ways. There's gonna be a lot
more. And then you have
all these people that are
screaming, "Oh yeah, but
what about the water?" You
know? Like, I did a conference in
Italy about the, the state of AI, and
m- my whole motivation was to
push people away from, don't see
yourself as an iOS developer
anymore. You're now a builder, and
you can use your skills in many more
ways. Also because apps are slowly going
away. People didn't like that. Like
a lot of people didn't like what I had to
say. And I don't think I was hyperbole, I was
just like, "This is how I see
the future." Maybe this is
not how it's going to be, but I'm pretty
sure a version of that will happen.
And the first question I got was, "Yeah,
but what about the insane water use on
data centers?" But then you
actually sit down and do the
maths, and then for most people if you
just skip one burger per month, that
compensates the, the CO2 output, or, like,
the water use in equivalent of tokens. I
mean,
the maths is, is... the maths is tricky, and
it depends if you add pre-training, then maybe
it's more than just one patty.... but it's
not off by a factor of 100, you know? So,
so the... or like golf is still using way
more water than all data centers
together. So are you also hating people
that play golf? Those people
grab on anything that they
think is bad about AI
without seeing the potential
things that might be good about AI.
- Mm-hmm.
- And I'm not saying everything's
good. It's certainly gonna
be a very transformative
technology for our society.
- There's to steel man the, the criticism in
general, I do wanna say in
my experience with Silicon
Valley there's a bit of a
bubble in the sense that
there's a kind of excitement
and an over- focus about
the positive that the
technology can bring.
- Yeah.
- And... which is great. It's
great to focus on... N- not to,
not to be paralyzed by fear and fear-
mongering and so on, but there's
also within that excitement, and
within everybody talking just to
each other, there's a
dismissal of the basic
human experience across the United States
and the Midwest, across the world.
Including the programmers we mentioned, including
all the people that are gonna lose their jobs,
including the s- the measurable
pain and suffering that happens at
the short-term scale when there's
change of any kind. Especially
large-scale transformative
change that we're about to face
if what we're talking about
will materialize. And so to
ha- having a bit of that
humility and awareness
about the tools you're building,
they're going to cause pain.
They will long term hopefully
bring about a better world,
and even more opportunities-
- Yeah
- ... and even more awesomeness. But
having that kind of like quiet moment
often of, of respect for the
pain that is going to be
felt. And so not, not enough
of that is, I think, done,
so it's, it's good to have a bit of that.
- And then I also have to
put against some of the
emails I got where people told me they
have a small business, and they've been
struggling. And, and OpenClaw
helped them automate a few of the
tedious tasks from, from collecting
invoices to like answering customer emails
that then freed them up and like cost
them a bit more joy in their life.
- Mm-hmm.
- Or, or some emails where they
told me that OpenClaw helped
their disabled daughter. That she's now
empowered and feels she can do
much more than before. Which is
amazing, right? Because
you could, you could do that before as
well. The technology was there. I didn't,
I didn't invent a whole
new thing, but I made it a
lot easier and more accessible, and that
did show people the possibilities
that they previously wouldn't see.
And now they apply it for good.
- Mm-hmm.
- Or like also the fact that, yes, I,
I, I suggest the, the, the latest and
best models, but you can totally
run this on free models. You
can run this locally. You can run
this on, on, on Keyme or other,
other, other models that are
way more accessible price-wise,
and still have a, a very powerful
system that might otherwise not be
possible. Because other things like,
I don't know, Entropik's CoWork
is locked in into their space, so
it's not all black and white.
There's... I got a lot of
emails that were heartwarming and amazing.
And, and I don't know, it
just made me really happy.
- Yeah, there's a lot... It has brought joy
into a lot of people's lives. Not just,
not just programmers. Like a lot
of people's lives. It's, it's,
it's beautiful to see. What gives you hope
about this whole thing we have going on
with human civilization?
- I mean, I inspired so many people.
There's like... there's this whole
builder vibe again. People are now
using AI in a more playful way
and are discovering what it can do and
how it can like help them in their life.
And creating new
places that are just sprawling of
creativity. I don't know. Like,
there's like ClawCoin in
Vienna. There's like 500
people. And there's such
a high percentage of
people that uh, want to present, which
is to me really surprising, because u-
usually
it's quite hard to find people that want to like
talk about what they built. And now it's, there's an
abundance. So that gives
me hope that we can,
we can figure shit out.
- And it makes it accessible
to basically everybody.
- Yeah.
- Just imagine all these people building,
especially as you make it
simpler and simpler, more
secure. It's like anybody who has ideas and
can express those ideas in language can
build. That's crazy.
- Yeah, that's ultimately power to
the people, and one of the beauty,
the beautiful things that come out of
AI. Not just, not just a slop generator.
- Well, Mr. Clawfather, I just realized
when I said that in the beginning,
I violated two trademarks, because
there's also the Godfather. I'm
getting sued by everybody. Um,
you're a wonderful human being.
You've created something really
special, a special community,
a special product, a special
set of ideas. Plus, the entire...
the humor, the good vibes,
the inspiration of all these
people building, the excitement
to build. So I'm truly grateful
for everything you've been
doing and for who you
are, and for sitting down
to talk with me today. Thank you, brother.
- Thanks for giving me the
chance to tell my story.
- Thanks for listening to this conversation with
Peter Steinberger. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the description,
where you can also find links to contact
me, ask questions, give
feedback and so on. And
now let me leave you with some words from
Voltaire. "With great power comes great
responsibility." Thank you for listening,
and hope to see you next time.